RESEARCH ARTICLE

 elifesciences.org


 Homeostatic reinforcement learning for
 integrating reward collection and
 physiological stability
 Mehdi Keramati1,2*, Boris Gutkin1,3*
 1
 Group for Neural Theory, INSERM U960, Departément des Etudes Cognitives, Ecole
 Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, Paris, France; 2Gatsby Computational
 Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London, United Kingdom; 3Center for
 Cognition and Decision Making, National Research University Higher School of
 Economics, Moscow, Russia


 Abstract Efficient regulation of internal homeostasis and defending it against perturbations
 requires adaptive behavioral strategies. However, the computational principles mediating the
 interaction between homeostatic and associative learning processes remain undefined. Here we
 use a definition of primary rewards, as outcomes fulfilling physiological needs, to build a normative
 theory showing how learning motivated behaviors may be modulated by internal states. Within
 this framework, we mathematically prove that seeking rewards is equivalent to the fundamental
 objective of physiological stability, defining the notion of physiological rationality of behavior. We
 further suggest a formal basis for temporal discounting of rewards by showing that discounting
 motivates animals to follow the shortest path in the space of physiological variables toward the
 desired setpoint. We also explain how animals learn to act predictively to preclude prospective
 homeostatic challenges, and several other behavioral patterns. Finally, we suggest a computational
 role for interaction between hypothalamus and the brain reward system.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.001
*For correspondence: mehdi@
gatsby.ucl.ac.uk (MK); boris.
gutkin@ens.fr (BG)

Competing interests: The
 Introduction
authors declare that no Survival requires living organisms to maintain their physiological integrity within the environment. In
competing interests exist. other words, they must preserve homeostasis (e.g. body temperature, glucose level, etc.). Yet, how
 might an animal learn to structure its behavioral strategies to obtain the outcomes necessary to fulfill
Funding: See page 23
 and even preclude homeostatic challenges? Such, efficient behavioral decisions surely should depend
Received: 18 September 2014 on two brain circuits working in concert: the hypothalamic homeostatic regulation (HR) system, and
Accepted: 03 November 2014 the cortico-basal ganglia reinforcement learning (RL) mechanism. However, the computational mecha-
Published: 02 December 2014 nisms underlying this obvious coupling remain poorly understood.
Reviewing editor: Eve Marder, The previously developed classical negative feedback models of HR have tried to explain the hypo-
Brandeis University, United thalamic function in behavioral sensitivity to the ‘internal’ state, by axiomatizing that animals minimize
States the deviation of some key physiological variables from their hypothetical setpoints (Marieb & Hoehn,
 2012). To this end, a direct corrective response is triggered when a deviation from setpoint is sensed
 Copyright Keramati and
 or anticipated (Sibly & McFarland, 1974; Sterling, 2012). A key lacuna in these models is how a sim-
Gutkin. This article is distributed
 ple corrective action (e.g. ‘go eat’) in response to a homeostatic deficit might be translated into a
under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License, complex behavioral strategy for interacting with the dynamic and uncertain external world.
which permits unrestricted use On the other hand, the computational theory of RL has proposed a viable computational account
and redistribution provided that for the role of the cortico-basal ganglia system in behavioral adaptation to the ‘external’ environment,
the original author and source by exploiting experienced environmental contingencies and reward history (Sutton & Barto, 1998;
are credited. Rangel et al., 2008). Critically, this theory is built upon one major axiom, namely, that the objective of


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 1 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 eLife digest Our survival depends on our ability to maintain internal states, such as body
 temperature and blood sugar levels, within narrowly defined ranges, despite being subject to
 constantly changing external forces. This process, which is known as homeostasis, requires humans
 and other animals to carry out specific behaviors—such as seeking out warmth or food—to
 compensate for changes in their environment. Animals must also learn to prevent the potential
 impact of changes that can be anticipated.
 A network that includes different regions of the brain allows animals to perform the behaviors
 that are needed to maintain homeostasis. However, this network is distinct from the network that
 supports the learning of new behaviors in general. These two systems must, therefore, interact so
 that animals can learn novel strategies to support their physiological stability, but it is not clear how
 animals do this.
 Keramati and Gutkin have now devised a mathematical model that explains the nature of this
 interaction, and that can account for many behaviors seen among animals, even those that might
 otherwise appear irrational. There are two assumptions at the heart of the model. First, it is assumed
 that animals are capable of guessing the impact of the outcome of their behaviors on their internal
 state. Second, it is assumed that animals find a behavior rewarding if they believe that the predicted
 impact of its outcome will reduce the difference between a particular internal state and its ideal
 value. For example, a form of behavior for a human might be going to the kitchen, and an outcome
 might be eating chocolate.
 Based on these two assumptions, the model shows that animals stabilize their internal state
 around its ideal value by simply learning to perform behaviors that lead to rewarding outcomes
 (such as going into the kitchen and eating chocolate). Their theory also explains the physiological
 importance of a type of behavior known as ‘delay discounting’. Animals displaying this form of
 behavior regard a positive outcome as less rewarding the longer they have to wait for it. The model
 proves mathematically that delay discounting is a logical way to optimize homeostasis.
 In addition to making a number of predictions that could be tested in experiments, Keramati and
 Gutkin argue that their model can account for the failure of homeostasis to limit food consumption
 whenever foods loaded with salt, sugar or fat are freely available.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.002


 behavior is to maximize reward acquisition. Yet, this suite of theoretical models does not resolve how
 the brain constructs the reward itself, and how the variability of the internal state impacts overt behavior.
 Accumulating neurobiological evidence indicates intricate intercommunication between the hypo-
 thalamus and the reward-learning circuitry (Palmiter, 2007; Yeo & Heisler, 2012; Rangel, 2013). The
 integration of the two systems is also behaviorally manifest in the classical behavioral pattern of antic-
 ipatory responding in which, animals learn to act predictively to preclude prospective homeostatic
 challenges. Moreover, the ‘good regulator’ theoretical principle implies that ‘every good regulator of
 a system must be a model of that system’ (Conant & Ashby, 1970), accentuating the necessity of
 learning a model (either explicit or implicit) of the environment in order to regulate internal variables,
 and thus, the necessity of associative learning processes being involved in homeostatic regulation.
 Given the apparent coupling of homeostatic and learning processes, here, we propose a formal
 hypothesis for the computations, at an algorithmic level, that may be performed in this biological
 integration of the two systems. More precisely, inspired by previous descriptive hypotheses on the
 interaction between motivation and learning (Hull, 1943; Spence, 1956; Mowrer, 1960), we suggest
 a principled model for how the rewarding value of outcomes is computed as a function of the animal's
 internal state, and of the approximated need-reduction ability of the outcome. The computed reward
 is then made available to RL systems that learn over a state-space including both internal and external
 states, resulting in approximate reinforcement of instrumental associations that reduce or prevent
 homeostatic imbalance.
 The paper is structured as follows: After giving a heuristic sketch of the theory, we show several
 analytical, behavioral, and neurobiological results. On the basis of the proposed computational inte-
 gration of the two systems, we prove analytically that reward-seeking and physiological stability are
 two sides of the same coin, and also provide a normative explanation for temporal discounting of


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 2 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 reward. Behaviorally, the theory gives a plausible unified account for anticipatory responding and the
 rise-fall pattern of the response rate. We show that the interaction between the two systems is critical
 in these behavioral phenomena and thus, neither classical RL nor classical HR theories can account for
 them. Neurobiologically, we show that our model can shed light on recent findings on the interaction
 between the hypothalamus and the reward-learning circuitry, namely, the modulation of dopaminergic
 activity by hypothalamic signals. Furthermore, we show how orosensory information can be integrated
 with internal signals in a principled way, resulting in accounting for experimental results on consumma-
 tory behaviors, as well as the pathological condition of over-eating induced by hyperpalatability.
 Finally, we discuss limitations of the theory, compare it with other theoretical accounts of motivation
 and internal state regulation, and outline testable predictions and future directions.


 Results
 Theory sketch
 A self-organizing system (i.e. an organism) can be defined as a system that opposes the second law of
 thermodynamics (Friston, 2010). In other words, biological systems actively resist the natural ten-
 dency to disorder by regulating their physiological state to fall within narrow bounds. This general
 process, known as homeostasis (Cannon, 1929; Bernard, 1957), includes adaptive behavioral strate-
 gies for counteracting and preventing self-entropy in the face of constantly changing environments. In
 this sense, one would expect organisms to reinforce responses that mitigate deviation of the internal
 state from desired ‘setpoints’. This is reminiscent of the drive-reduction theory (Hull, 1943; Spence,
 1956; Mowrer, 1960) according to which, one of the major mechanisms underlying reward is the use-
 fulness of the corresponding outcome in fulfilling the homeostatic needs of the organism (Cabanac,
 1971). Inspired by these considerations (i.e. preservation of self-order and reduction of deviations), we
 propose a formal definition of primary reward (equivalently: reinforcer, economic utility) as the approx-
 imated ability of an outcome to restore the internal equilibrium of the physiological state. We then
 demonstrate that our formal homeostatic reinforcement learning framework accounts for some phe-
 nomena that classical drive-reduction was unable to explain.
 We first define ‘homeostatic space’ as a multidimensional metric space in which each dimension
 represents one physiologically-regulated variable (the horizontal plane in Figure 1). The physio-
 logical state of the animal at each time t can be represented as a point in this space, denoted by
 Ht = (h1,t ,h2,t ,..,hN,t ), where hi ,t indicates the state of the i-th physiological variable. For example, hi ,t can
 refer to the animal's glucose level, body temperature, plasma osmolality, etc. The homeostatic set-
 point, as the ideal internal state, can be denoted by H * = (h1* ,h2* ,..,hN* ). As a mapping from the physio-
 logical to the motivational state, we define the ‘drive’ as the distance of the internal state from the
 setpoint (the three-dimensional surface in Figure 1):

 n
 D (Ht ) = m ∑Ni =1 hi∗ – hi ,t (1)

 m and n are free parameters that induce important nonlinear effects on the mapping between home-
 ostatic deviations and their motivational consequences. Note that for the simple case of m = n = 1, the
 drive function reduces to Euclidian distance. We will later consider more general nonlinear mappings
 in terms of classical utility theory. We will also discuss that the drive function can be viewed as equiva-
 lent to the information-theoretic notion of surprise, defined as the negative log-probability of finding
 an organism in a certain state (D (Ht ) = –ln p(Ht )).
 Having defined drive, we can now provide a formal definition for primary reward. Let's assume that
 as the result of an action, the animal receives an outcome ot at time t. The impact of this outcome on
 different dimensions of the animal's internal state can be denoted by K t = (k1,t ,k 2,t ,..,k N ,t ). For example,
 k i ,t can be the quantity of glucose received as a result of outcome ot . Hence, the outcome results in a
 transition of the physiological state from Ht to Ht +1 = Ht + K t (See Figure 1) and thus, a transition of the
 drive state from D (Ht ) to D (Ht +1 ) = D (Ht + K t ). Accordingly, the rewarding value of this outcome can be
 defined as the consequent reduction of drive:

 r (Ht ,K t ) = D (Ht ) – D (Ht +1 )
 = D (Ht ) – D (Ht + K t ) (2)


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 3 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 1. Schematics of the model in an exemplary two-dimensional homeostatic space. Upon performing an
 action, the animal receives an outcome K t from the environment. The rewarding value of this outcome depends on
 its ability to make the internal state, Ht , closer to the homeostatic setpoint, H *, and thus reduce the drive level (the
 vertical axis). This experienced reward, denoted by r (Ht ,K t ) , is then learned by an RL algorithm. Here a model-free
 RL algorithm is shown in which a reward prediction error signal is computed by comparing the realized reward
 and the expected rewarding value of the performed response. This signal is then used to update the subjective
 value attributed to the corresponding response. Subjective values of alternative choices bias the action selection
 process.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.003


 Intuitively, the rewarding value of an outcome depends on the ability of its constituting ele-
 ments to reduce the homeostatic distance from the setpoint or equivalently, to counteract self-
 entropy. As discussed later, the additive effect ( K t ) of these constituting elements on the internal
 state can be approximated by the orosensory properties of outcomes. We will also discuss how
 erroneous estimation of drive reduction can potentially be a cause for maladaptive consumptive
 behaviors.
 We hypothesize in this paper that the primary reward constructed as proposed in Equation 2 is
 used by the brain's reward learning machinery to structure behavior. Incorporating this physiological
 reward definition in a normative RL theory allows us to derive one major result of our theory, which is
 that the rationality of behavioral patterns is geared toward maintaining physiological stability.

 Rationality of the theory
 Here we show that our definition of reward reconciles the RL and HR theories in terms of their norma-
 tive assumptions: reward acquisition and physiological stability are mathematically equivalent behav-
 ioral objectives. More precisely, given the proposed definition of reward and given that animals
 discount future rewards (Chung & Herrnstein, 1967), any behavioral policy, π, that maximizes the sum
 of discounted rewards ( SDR ) also minimizes the sum of discounted deviations from the setpoint, and
 vice versa. In fact, starting from an initial internal state H0, the sum of discounted deviations (SDD) for
 a certain behavioral policy π that causes the internal state to move in the homeostatic space along the
 trajectory p(π), can be defined as:


 SDDπ (H 0 ) = ∫ γ t .D ( H t ).dt (3)
 p(π)

 Similarly, the sum of discounted rewards (SDR) for a policy π can be defined as:


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 4 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 SDRπ (H0 ) = ∫ γ t .rt .dt = ∫ γ t . (D (Ht ) – D (Ht +dt )) .dt (4)
 p (π ) p (π )


 It is then rather straightforward to show that for any initial state H0, we will have (See ‘Materials and
 methods’ for the proof):

 if γ < 1 : argmin SDDπ (H0 ) = argmax SDRπ (H0 ) (5)
 π π

 where γ is the discount factor. In other words, the same behavioral policy satisfies optimal reward-
 seeking as well as optimal homeostatic maintenance. In this respect, reward acquisition sought by the
 RL system is an efficient means to guide an animal's behavior toward fulfilling the basic objective of
 defending homeostasis. Thus, our theory suggests a physiological basis for the rationality of reward
 seeking.

 Normative role of temporal discounting
 In the domain of animal behavior, one fundamental question is why animals should discount rewards
 the further they are in the future. Our theory indicates that reward seeking without discounting (i.e., if
 γ = 1) would not lead, and may even be detrimental, to physiological stability (See ‘Materials and
 methods’). Intuitively, this is because a future-discounting agent would always tend to expedite bigger
 rewards and postpone punishments. Such an agent, therefore, tries to reduce homeostatic deviations
 (which is rewarding) as soon as possible, and thus, tries to find the shortest path toward the setpoint.
 A non-discounting agent, in contrast, can always compensate for a deviation-induced punishment by
 reducing that deviation any time in the future.
 While the formal proof of the necessity of discounting is given in the ‘Materials and methods’, let
 us give an intuitive explanation. Imagine you had to plan a 1-hr hill walk from a drop-point toward a
 pickup point, during which you wanted to minimize the height (equivalent to drive) summed over the
 path you take. In this summation, if you give higher weights to your height in the near future as com-
 pared to later times, the optimum path would be to descend the hill and spend as long as possible
 at the bottom (i.e. homeostatic setpoint) before returning to the pickup point. Equation 5 shows
 that this optimization is equivalent to optimizing the total discounted rewards along the path, given
 that descending and ascending steps are defined as being rewarding and punishing, respectively
 (Equation 2).
 In contrast, if at all points in time you give equal weights to your height, then the summed height
 over path only depends on the drop and pickup points, since every ascend can be compensated with
 a descend at any time. In other words, in the absence of discounting, the rewarding value of a behavioral
 policy that changes the internal state only depends on the initial and final internal states, regardless of
 its trajectory in the homeostatic space. Thus, when γ = 1, the values of any two behavioral policies with
 equal net shifts of the internal state are equal, even if one policy moves the internal state along the
 shortest path, whereas the other policy results in large deviations of the internal state from the set-
 point and threatens survival. These results hold for any form of temporal discounting (e.g., exponen-
 tial, hyperbolic). In this respect, our theory provides a normative explanation for the necessity of
 temporal discounting of reward: to maintain internal stability, it is necessary to discount future rewards.

 A normative account of anticipatory responding
 A paradigmatic example of behaviors governed by the internal state is the anticipatory responses
 geared to preclude perturbations in regulated variables even before any physiological depletion (neg-
 ative feedback) is detectable. Anticipatory eating and drinking that occur before any discernible
 homeostatic deviation (Woods & Seeley, 2002), anticipatory shivering in response to a cue that pre-
 dicts the cold (Mansfield et al., 1983; Hjeresen et al., 1986), and insulin secretion prior to meal initi-
 ation (Woods, 1991), are only a few examples of anticipatory responding.
 One clear example of a conditioned homeostatic response is animals' progressive tolerance to
 ethanol-induced hypothermia. Experiments show that when ethanol injections are preceded (i.e., are
 predictable) by a distinctive cue, the ethanol-induced drop of the body core temperature of animals
 diminishes along the trials (Mansfield & Cunningham, 1980). Figure 2 shows that when the temper-
 ature was measured 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after daily injections, the drop of temperature below
 the baseline was significant on the first day, but gradually disappeared over 8 days. Interestingly, in the


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 5 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 first extinction trial on the ninth day where the
 ethanol was omitted, the animal's temperature
 exhibited a significant increase above normal
 after cue presentation. This indicates that the
 enhanced tolerance response to ethanol is trig-
 gered by the cue, and results in an increase of
 temperature in order to compensate for the forth-
 coming ethanol-induced hypothermia. Thus, this
 tolerance response is mediated by associative
 learning processes, and is aimed at regulating
 temperature. Here we demonstrate that the inte-
 gration of HR and RL processes accounts for this
 phenomenon.
 We simulate the model in an artificial environ-
 ment where on every trial, the agent can choose
 between initiating a tolerance response and
 doing nothing, upon observing a cue (Figure 3A).
 Figure 2. Experimental results (adapted from The cue is then followed by a forced drop of
 Mansfield & Cunningham, 1980) on the acquisition temperature, simulating the effect of ethanol
 and extinction of conditioned tolerance response to
 (Figure 3B). We also assume that in the absence
 ethanol. (A) In each block (day) of the experiment, the
 of injection, the temperature does not change.
 animal received ethanol injection after the presentation
 of the stimulus. (B) The change in the body temperature
 However, if the agent chooses to initiate the tol-
 was measured 30, 60, 90, and 120 min after ethanol erance response in this condition, the temperature
 administration. Initially, the hypothermic effect of increases gradually (Figure 3D). Thus, if ethanol
 ethanol decreased the body temperature of animals. injection is preceded by cue-triggered toler-
 After several training days, however, animals learned ance response, the combined effect (Figure 3F,
 to activate a tolerance response upon observing the as superposition of Figure 3B,D) will have less
 stimulus, resulting in smaller deviations from the deviation from the setpoint as compared to
 temperature setpoint. If the stimulus was not followed when no response is taken (Figure 3B). As pun-
 by ethanol injection, as in the first day of extinction (E1), ishment (as the opposite of reward) in our model
 the activation of the conditioned tolerance response
 is defined by the extent to which the deviation
 resulted in an increase in body temperature. The
 from the setpoint increases, the ‘null’ response
 tolerance response was weakened after several (four)
 extinction sessions, resulting in increased deviation
 will have a bigger punishing value than the ‘tol-
 from the setpoint in the first day of re-acquisition (R1), erance’ response and thus, the agent gradually
 where presentation of the cue was again followed by reinforces the ‘tolerance’ action (Figure 3C)
 ethanol injection. (More precisely, the rewarding value of each
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.004 action is defined by the sum of discounted
 drive-reductions during the 24 hr upon taking
 that action). This results in gradual fade of the
 ethanol-induced deviation of temperature from setpoint (Figure 3E; See Figure 3—source data 1
 for simulation details).
 Clearly, if after this learning process cue-presentation is no longer followed by ethanol injection
 (as in the first extinction trial, E1), the cue-triggered tolerance response increases the temperate
 beyond the setpoint (Figure 3E).
 In general, these results show that the tolerance response caused by predicted hypothermia is an
 optimal behavior in terms of minimizing homeostatic deviation and thus, maximizing reward. Thus,
 this optimal homeostatic maintenance policy is acquired by associative learning mechanisms.
 Our theory implies that animals are capable of learning not only Pavlovian (e.g. shivering, or tolerance
 to ethanol), but also instrumental anticipatory responding (e.g., pressing a lever to receive warmth, in
 response to a cold-predicting cue). This prediction is in contrast to the theory of predictive homeostasis
 (also known as allostasis) where anticipatory behaviors are only reflexive responses to the predicted
 homeostatic deprivation upon observing cues (Woods & Ramsay, 2007; Sterling, 2012).

 Behavioral plausibility of drive: accounting for key phenomena
 The definition of the drive function (Equation 1) in our model has two degrees of freedom: m and
 n are free parameters whose values determine the properties of the homeostatic space metric.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 6 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 3. Simulation result on anticipatory responding. (A) In every trial, the simulated agent can choose between
 initiating a tolerance response and doing nothing, upon observing the stimulus. Regardless of the agent's choice,
 ethanol is administered after 1 hr, followed by four temperature measurements every 30 min. (B) Dynamics of
 temperature upon ethanol injection. (C) Learning curve for choosing the ‘tolerance’ response. (D) Dynamics of
 temperature upon initiating the tolerance response. (E) Temperature profile during several simulated trails.
 (F) Dynamics of temperature upon initiating the tolerance response, followed by ethanol administration.
 Plots c and e are averaged over 500 simulated agents.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.005
 The following source data is available for figure 3:
 Source data 1. Free parameters for the anticipatory responding simulation.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.006


 Appropriate choice of m and n (n > m > 1) permits our theory to account for the following four key
 behavioral phenomena in a unified framework. First, it accounts for the fact that the reinforcing value
 of an appetitive outcome increases as a function of its dose (K t ) (Figure 4A):

 ∂r (Ht , K t )
 ∂k j ,t
 >0 ( )
 : for K t = 0,0,…, k j ,t ,… ,0 and k j ,t > 0 (6)


 This is supported by the fact that in progressive ratio schedules of reinforcement rats maintain
 higher breakpoints when reinforced with bigger appetitive outcomes, reflecting higher motivation
 toward them (Hodos, 1961; Skjoldager et al., 1993). Secondly, the model accounts for the potentiat-
 ing effect of the deprivation level on the reinforcing value (i.e., food will be more rewarding when the
 animal is hungrier) (Figure 4B,C):
 ∂r (Ht ,K t )
 ∂ h j* – h j ,t
 >0 ( )
 : for K t = 0,0,… , k j ,t ,… ,0 and k j ,t > 0 (7)


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 7 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 4. Schematic illustration of the behavioral properties of the drive function. (A) excitatory effect of the dose
 of outcome on its rewarding value. (B, C) excitatory effect of deprivation level on the rewarding value of outcomes:
 Increased deprivation increases the rewarding value of reducing drive (B), and increases the punishing value of
 increasing drive (C). (D) inhibitory effect of irrelevant drives on the rewarding value of outcomes.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.007


 This is consistent with experimental evidence showing that the level of food deprivation in rats
 increases the breakpoint in a progressive ratio schedule (Hodos, 1961). Note that this point effec-
 tively establishes a formal extension for the ‘incentive’ concept as defined by incentive salience theory
 (Berridge, 2012) (Discussed later).
 Thirdly, the theory accounts for the inhibitory effect of irrelevant drives, which is consistent with a
 large body of behavioral experiments showing competition between different motivational systems (See
 Dickinson & Balleine, 2002 for a review). In other words, as the deprivation level for one need increases,
 it inhibits the rewarding value of other outcomes that satisfy irrelevant motivational systems (Figure 4D):

 ∂r (Ht , K t )
 ∂ hi* − hi ,t
 >0 ( )
 : for all i ≠ j , where K t = 0,0,… , k j ,t ,… ,0 and k j ,t > 0 (8)


 Intuitively, one does not play chess, or even search for sex, on an empty stomach. As some exam-
 ples, calcium deprivation reduces the appetite for phosphorus, and hunger inhibits sexual behavior
 (Dickinson & Balleine, 2002).
 Finally, the theory naturally captures the risk-aversive nature of behavior. The rewarding value in our
 model is a concave function of the corresponding outcome magnitude:

 ∂ 2r (Ht , K t )
 ∂k j ,t 2
 <0 ( )
 : for K t = 0,0,… , k j ,t ,… ,0 and k j ,t > 0 (9)


 It is well known that the concavity of the economic utility function is equivalent to risk aversion
 (Mas-Colell et al., 1995). Indeed, simulating the model shows that when faced with two options with
 equal expected payoffs, the model learns to choose the more certain option as opposed to the risky
 one (Figure 5; See Figure 5—source data 1 for simulation details). This is because frequent small
 deviations from the setpoint are preferable to rare drastic deviations. In fact, our theory suggests the


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 8 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 5. Risk aversion simulation. In a conditioned place preference paradigm, the agent's presence in the left
 and the right compartments has equal expected payoffs, but different levels of risk (A) Panel (B) shows the Markov
 decision process of the same task. In fact, in every trial, the agent chooses whether to stay it the current compartment,
 or transit to the other one. The average input of energy per trial, regardless of the animal's choice, is set such that
 it is equal to the animal's normal energy expenditure. Thus, the internal state stays close to its initial level, which is
 equal to the setpoint here (D). The model learns to prefer the non-risky over the risky compartments (C) in order to
 avoid severe deviations from the setpoint.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.008
 The following source data is available for figure 5:
 Source data 1. Free parameters for the risk-aversion simulations.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.009


 intuition that when the expected physiological instability caused by two behavioral options are equal,
 organisms do not choose the risky option, because the severe, though unlikely, physiological instabili-
 ties that it can cause might be life-threatening.
 Our unified explanation for the above four behavioral patterns suggests that they may all arise from
 the functional form of the mapping from the physiological to the motivational state. In this sense, we
 propose that these behavioral phenomena are signatures of the coupling between the homeostatic and
 the associative learning systems. We will discuss later that m, n, and H* can be regarded as free param-
 eters of an evolutionary process, which eventually determine the equilibrium density of the species.
 Note that the equations in this section hold only when the internal state remains below the set-
 point. However, the drive function is symmetric with respect to the setpoint and thus, analogous con-
 clusions can be derived for other three quarters of the homeostatic space.

 Stepping back from the brink
 Since learning requires experience, learning whether an action in a certain internal state decreases or
 increases the drive (i.e. is rewarding or punishing, respectively) would require our model to have expe-
 rienced that internal state. Living organisms, however, cannot just experience internal states with
 extreme and life threatening homeostatic deviations in order to learn that the actions that cause them
 are bad. For example, once the body temperature goes beyond 45°C, the organism can never return.
 We now show how our model manages this problem; that is, it avoids voluntarily experiencing
 extreme homeostatic deviations and hence ensures that the animal does not voluntarily endanger its
 physiological integrity (simulations in Figure 6). In the simplest case, let us assume that the model is


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 9 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 6. Simulations showing that the model avoids extreme deviations. Starting from 30, the agent can either
 decrease or increase its internal state by one unit in each trial. (A) The number of visits at each internal state after
 106 trials. (B) The drive function in the one-dimensional homeostatic space. (setpoint = 0). The mean (C) and
 standard deviation (D) of the internal state of 105 agents, along 1500 trials.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.010
 The following source data and figure supplements are available for figure 6:
 Source data 1. Free parameters for the simulations showing that the model avoids extreme homeostatic deviations.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.011
 Figure supplement 1. The Markov Decision Process used for simulation results presented in Figure 6 and Figure 6—
 figure supplements 2–7.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.012
 Figure supplement 2. Value function (A) and choice preferences (B) for state–action pairs after simulating one
 agent for 106 trials (As in Figure 6).
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.013
 Figure supplement 3. Simulation results replicating Figure 6, with the difference that the initial internal state was zero.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.014
 Figure supplement 4. Simulation results replicating Figure 6, with the difference that the initial internal state was
 zero, and the rate of exploration, β, was 0.03.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.015
 Figure supplement 5. Simulation results replicating Figure 6, with the difference that the initial internal state was
 zero, and also m = n = 1.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.016
 Figure supplement 6. Simulation results replicating Figure 6, with the difference that the initial internal state was
 zero, and the discount factor, γ, was zero.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.017
 Figure supplement 7. Simulation results replicating Figure 6, with the difference that the initial internal state was
 zero, and the discount factor, γ, was one (no discounting).
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.018


 tabula rasa: it starts from absolute ignorance about the value of state–action pairs, and can freely change
 its internal state in the homeostatic space. In a one-dimensional space, it means that the agent can
 freely increase or decrease the internal state (Figure 6—figure supplement 1). As the value of ‘increase’
 and ‘decrease’ actions at all internal states are initialized to zero, the agent starts by performing
 a random walk in the homeostatic space. However, the probability of choosing the same action for
 z times in a row decreases exponentially as z increases ( p(z ) = 2 – z ): for example, the probability of


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 10 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 choosing ‘increase’ is 2−1 = 0.5, the probability of choosing two successive ‘increases’ is 2−1 = 0.25, the
 probability of choosing three successive ‘increases’ is 2−3 = 0.125, and so on. Thus, it is highly likely for
 the agent to return at least one step back, before getting too far from its starting point. When the
 agent returns to a state it had previously experienced, going in the same deviation-increasing direc-
 tion will be less likely than the first time (i.e., than 50–50), since the agent has already experienced the
 punishment caused by that state–action pair once. Repetition of this process results in the agent grad-
 ually getting more and more attracted to the setpoint, without ever having experienced internal states
 that are beyond a certain limit (i.e. the brink of death).
 Simulating the model in a one-dimensional space shows that even after starting from a rather deviated
 internal state (initial state = 30, setpoint = 0), the agent never visits states with a deviation of more than
 40 units after 106 trials (every action is assumed to change the state by one unit) (Figure 6A; See
 Figure 6—figure supplements 1,2, and Figure 6—source data 1 for simulation details). Also, simulating
 105 agents over 1500 trials (starting from state 30) shows that the mean value of the internal state across
 all agents converges to the setpoint (Figure 5C), and its variance converges to a steady-state level
 (Figure 5D). This shows that all agents stay within certain bounds around the setpoint (The maximum
 deviation from the setpoint among all the 105 agents over the 1500 trials was 61). Also, this property of the
 model is shown to be insensitive to the parameters of the model, like the initial internal state (Figure 6—
 figure supplement 3), the rate of exploration (Figure 6—figure supplement 4), m and n (Figure 6—
 figure supplement 5), or the discount factor (Figure 6—figure supplements 6,7). These parameters
 only affect the rate of convergence or the distribution over visited states, but not the general property
 of never-visiting-drastic-deviations (existence of a boundary). Moreover, this property can be generalized
 to multi-dimensional homeostatic spaces. Therefore, our theory suggests a potential normative explana-
 tion for how animals (who might be a priori naïve about potential dangers of certain internal states)
 would learn to avoid extreme physiological instability, without ever exploring how good or bad they are.

 Orosensory-based approximation of post-ingestive effects
 As mentioned, we hypothesize that orosensory properties of food and water provide the animal with
 an estimate, Kˆ t , of their true post-ingestive effect, K t , on the internal state. Such association between
 sensory and post-ingestive properties could have been developed through prior learning (Swithers
 et al., 2009; Swithers et al., 2010; Beeler et al., 2012) or evolutionary mechanisms (Breslin, 2013).
 Based on this sensory approximation, the only information required to compute the reward (and thus
 the reward prediction error) is the current physiological state (Ht ) and the sensory-based approxima-
 tion of the nutritional content of the outcome (Kˆ t ):

 ( ) (
 r Ht ,Kˆ t = D (Ht ) – D Ht + Kˆ t ) (10)

 Clearly, the evolution of the internal state itself depends only on the actual ( K t ) post-ingestive
 effects of the outcome. That is Ht +1 = Ht + K t .
 According to Equation 10, the reinforcing value of food and water outcomes can be approximated
 as soon as they are sensed/consumed, without having to wait for the outcome to be digested and the
 drive to be reduced. This proposition is compatible with the fact that dopamine neurons exhibit instan-
 taneous, rather than delayed, burst activity in response to unexpected food reward (Schneider, 1989;
 Schultz et al., 1997). Moreover, it might provide a formal explanations for the experimental fact that
 intravenous injection (and even intragastric intubation, in some cases) of food is not rewarding even
 though its drive reduction effect is equal to when it is ingested orally (Miller & Kessen, 1952) (See also
 Ren et al., 2010). In fact, if the post-ingestive effect of food is estimated by its sensory properties, the
 reinforcing value of intravenously injected food that lacks sensory aspects will be effectively zero. In the
 same line of reasoning, the theory suggests that animals' motivation toward palatable foods, such as
 saccharine, that have no caloric content (and thus no need-reduction effect) is due to erroneous over-
 estimation of their drive-reduction capacity, misguided by their taste or smell. Note that the rationality
 of our theory, as shown in Equation 5, holds only as long as Kˆ t is an unbiased estimation of K t . Otherwise,
 pathological conditions could emerge.
 Last but not least, the orosensory-based approximation provides a computational hypothesis for the
 separation of reinforcement and satiation effects. A seminal series of experiments (McFarland, 1969) dem-
 onstrated that the reinforcing and satiating (i.e., need reduction) effects of drinking behavior, dissociable
 from one another, are governed by the orosensory and alimentary components of the water, respectively.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 11 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 Two groups of water-deprived animals learned to press a green key to self-administer water orally.
 After this pre-training session, pressing the green key had no consequence anymore, whereas pressing
 a novel yellow key resulted in the oral delivery of water in one group, and intragastric (through a fistula)
 delivery of water in the second group. Results showed that the green key gradually extinguished in both
 groups (Figure 7A,B). During this time, responding on the yellow key in the oral group initially increased
 but then gradually extinguished (rise-fall pattern; Figure 7A). The second group, however, showed no
 motivation for the yellow key (Figure 7B). This shows that only oral, but not intragastric, self-administration
 of water is reinforcing for thirsty animals. Our model accounts for these behavioral dynamics.
 Simulating the model shows that the agent's subjective probability of receiving water upon pressing
 the green key gradually decreases to zero in both groups (Figure 8C,D). As this predicted outcome
 (alimentary content) decreases, its approximated thirst-reduction effect (equal to reward in our frame-
 work) decreases as well, resulting in the extinction of pressing the green key (Figure 8A,B). As for the
 yellow key, the oral agent initially increases the rate of responding (Figure 8A) as the subjective
 probability of receiving water upon pressing the yellow key increases (Figure 8C). Gradually, however,
 the internal state of the animal reaches the homeostatic setpoint (Figure 8E), resulting in diminishing
 motivation (thirst-reduction effect) of seeking water (Figure 8A). Thus, our model shows that whereas
 the ascending limb of the response curve represents a learning effect, the descending limb is due to
 mitigated homeostatic imbalance (i.e., unlearning vs. satiation). Notably, classical RL models only
 explain the ascending, and classical HR models only explain the descending pattern.
 In contrast to the oral agent, the fistula agent never learns to press the yellow key (Figure 8B). This is
 because the approximated alimentary content attributed to this response remains zero (Figure 8D) and so
 does its drive-reduction effect. Note that as above, the sensory-based approximation (Kˆ t ) of the alimen-
 tary effect of water in the oral and fistula cases is assumed to be equal to its actual effect (K t ) and zero,
 respectively (See Figure 8—figure supplements 1,2, and Figure 8—source data 1 for simulation details).
 Our theory also suggests that in contrast to reinforcement (above), satiation is independent of the
 sensory aspects of water and only depends on its post-ingestive effects. In fact, experiments show that
 when different proportions of water were delivered via the two routes in different groups, satiation
 (i.e., suppression of responding) only depended on the total amount of water ingested, regardless of
 the delivery route (McFarland, 1969).
 Our model accounts for these data (Figure 9), since the evolution of the internal state only depends
 on the actual water ingested. For example, whether water is administered completely orally (Figure 9,
 left column) or half-orally-half-intragastrically (Figure 9, right column), the agent stops seeking water
 when the setpoint is reached. As only oral delivery is sensed, the subjective outcome magnitude
 converges to 1 (Figure 9C) and 0.5 (Figure 9D) units for the two cases, respectively. When the set-
 point is reached, consuming more water results in overshooting the setpoint (increasing homeostatic


 Figure 7. Experimental results (adapted from McFarland, 1969) on learning the reinforcing effect of oral vs.
 intragastric delivery of water. Thirsty animals were initially trained to peck at a green key to receive water orally.
 In the next phase, pecking at the green key had no consequence, while pecking at a novel yellow key resulted in
 oral delivery of water in one group (A), and intragastric injection of the same amount of water through a fistula in a
 second group (B). In the first group, responding was rapidly transferred from the green to the yellow key, and then
 suppressed. In the fistula group, the yellow key was not reinforced.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.019


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 12 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 8. Simulation results replicating the data from McFarland (1969) on learning the reinforcing effect of oral vs.
 intragastric delivery of water. As in the experiment, two groups of simulated agents were pre-trained to respond on
 the green key to receive oral delivery of water. During the test phase, the green key had no consequence, whereas a
 novel yellow key resulted in oral delivery in one group (A) and intragastric injection in the second group (B). All agents
 started this phase in a thirsty state (initial internal state = 0; setpoint = 0). In the oral group, responding transferred
 rapidly from the green to the yellow key and was then suppressed (A) as the internal state approached the setpoint
 (E). This transfer is due to gradually updating the subjective probability of receiving water outcome upon responding
 on either key (C). In the fistula group, as the water was not sensed, the outcome expectation converged to zero for
 both keys (D) and thus, responding was extinguished (B). As a result, the internal state changed only slightly (F).
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.020
 The following source data and figure supplements are available for figure 8:
 Source data 1. Free parameters for the reinforcing vs. satiation simulations.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.021
 Figure supplement 1. A model-based homeostatic RL system. Upon performing an action in a certain state, the
 agent receives an outcome, K t , which results in the internal state to shift from Ht to Ht + K t .
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.022
 Figure supplement 2. The Markov Decision Process used for simulating the reinforcing vs. satiation effects of water.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.023


 deviation) and thus, is punishing. Therefore, both agents self-administer the same total amount of
 water, equal to what is required for reaching the setpoint.
 However, as the sensed amount of water is bigger in the completely-oral case, water-seeking beha-
 vior is approximated to have a higher thirst-reduction effect. As a result, the reinforcing value of water-
 seeking is higher in the oral case (as compared to the half-oral-half- intragastric case) and thus, the rate
 of responding is higher. This, in turn, results in faster convergence of the internal state to the setpoint


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 13 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 9. Simulation results of the satiation test. Left column shows results for the case where water was received
 only orally. Rate of responding drops rapidly (A) as the internal state approaches the setpoint (E). Also, the agent
 learns rapidly that upon every key pecking, it receives 1.0 unit of water (C). On the right column, upon every
 key-peck, 0.5 unit of water is received orally, and 0.5 unit is received via the fistula. As only oral delivery is sensed by
 the agent, the subjective outcome-magnitude converges to 0.5 (D). As a result, the reinforcing value of key-pecking
 is less than that of the oral case and thus, the rate of responding is lower (B). This in turn results in slower conver-
 gence of the internal state to the setpoint (F). The MDP and the free parameters used for simulation are the same
 as in Figure 8.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.024


 (compare Figure 9E,F). In this respect, we predict that the oral/fistula proportion affects the speed of
 satiation: the higher the proportion is, the faster the satiety state is reached and thus, the faster the
 descending limb of responding emerges.

 Discussion
 Theories of conditioning are founded on the argument that animals seek reward, while reward may be
 defined, at least in the behaviorist approach, as what animals seek. This apparently circular argument
 relies on the hypothetical and out-of-reach axiom of reward-maximization as the behavioral objective
 of animals. Physiological stability, however, is an observable fact. Here, we develop a coherent math-
 ematical theory where physiological stability is put as the basic axiom, and reward is defined in physi-
 ological terms. We demonstrated that reinforcement learning algorithms under such a definition of
 physiological reward lead to optimal policies that both maximize reward collection and minimize
 homeostatic needs. This argues for behavioral rationality of physiological integrity maintenance and


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 14 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 further shows that temporal discounting of rewards is paramount for homeostatic maintenance.
 Furthermore, we demonstrated that such integration of the two systems can account for several behav-
 ioral phenomena, including anticipatory responding, the rise-fall pattern of food-seeking response,
 risk-aversion, and competition between motivational systems. Here we argue that our framework
 may also shed light on the computational role of the interaction between the brain reward circuitry
 and the homeostatic regulation system; namely, the modulation of midbrain dopaminergic activity by
 hypothalamic signals.

 Neural substrates
 Homeostatic regulation critically depends on sensing the internal state. In the case of energy regula-
 tion, for example, the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus integrates peripheral hormones including
 leptin, insulin, and ghrelin, whose circulating levels reflect the internal abundance of fat, abundance of
 carbohydrate, and hunger, respectively (Williams & Elmquist, 2012). In our model, the deprivation
 level has an excitatory effect on the rewarding value of outcomes (Equation 7) and thus on the reward
 prediction error (RPE). Consistently, recent evidence indicates neuronal pathways through which
 energy state-monitoring peptides modulate the activity of midbrain dopamine neurons, which sup-
 posedly carry the RPE signal (Palmiter, 2007).
 Namely, orexin neurons, which project from the lateral hypothalamus area to several brain regions
 including the ventral tegmental area (VTA) (Sakurai et al., 1998), have been shown to have an excita-
 tory effect on dopaminergic activity (Korotkova et al., 2003; Narita et al., 2006), as well as feeding
 behavior (Rodgers et al., 2001). Orexin neurons are responsive to peripheral metabolic signals as well
 as to the animal's deprivation level (Burdakov et al., 2005), as they are innervated by orexigenic
 and anorexigenic neural populations in the arcuate nucleus where circulating peptides are sensed.
 Accordingly, orexin neurons are suggested to act as an interface between internal states and the
 reward learning circuit (Palmiter, 2007). In parallel with the orexinergic pathway, ghrelin, leptin and
 insulin receptors are also expressed on the VTA dopamine neurons, providing a further direct interface
 between the HR and RL systems. Consistently, whereas leptin and insulin inhibit dopamine activity
 and feeding behavior, ghrelin has an excitatory effect on them (See Palmiter, 2007 for a review).
 The reinforcing value of food outcome (and thus RPE signal) in our theory is not only modulated
 by the internal state, but also by the orosensory information that approximates the need-reduction
 effects. In this respect, endogenous opioids and μ-opioid receptors have long been implicated in the
 hedonic aspects of food, signaled by its orosensory properties. Systemic administration of opioid
 antagonists decreases subjective pleasantness rating and affective responses for palatable foods in
 humans (Yeomans & Wright, 1991) and rats (Doyle et al., 1993), respectively. Supposedly through
 modulating palatability, opioids also control food intake (Sanger & McCarthy, 1980) as well as instru-
 mental food-seeking behavior (Cleary et al., 1996). For example, opioid antagonists decrease the
 breakpoint in progressive ratio schedules of reinforcement with food (Barbano et al., 2009), whereas
 opioid agonists produce the opposite effect (Solinas & Goldberg, 2005). This reflects the influence of
 orosensory information on the reinforcing effect of food. Consistent with our model, these influences
 have mainly been attributed to the effect of opiates on increasing extracellular dopamine levels in the
 Nucleus Accumbens (NAc) (Devine et al., 1993) through its action on μ-opioid receptors in the VTA
 and NAc (Noel & Wise, 1993; Zhang & Kelley, 1997).
 Such orosensory-based approximation of nutritional content, as discussed before, could have been
 obtained through evolutionary processes (Breslin, 2013), as well as through prior learning (Beeler
 et al., 2012; Swithers et al., 2009, 2010). In the latter case, approximations based on orosensory or
 contextual cues can be updated so as to match the true nutritional value, resulting in a rational neural/
 behavioral response to food stimuli (de Araujo et al., 2008).

 Irrational behavior: the case of over-eating
 Above, we developed a normative theory for reward-seeking behaviors that lead to homeostatic sta-
 bility. However, animals do not always follow rational behavioral patterns, notably as exemplified in
 eating disorders, drug addiction, and many other psychiatric diseases. Here we discuss one prominent
 example of such irrational behavior within the context of our theory.
 Binge eating is a disorder characterized by compulsive eating even when the person is not hungry.
 Among the many risk factors of developing binge eating, a prominent one is having easy access to
 hyperpalatable foods, commonly defined as those loaded with fat, sugar, or salt (Rolls, 2007). As an


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 15 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 attempt to explain this risk factor, we discuss one of the points of vulnerability of our theory that can
 induce irrational choices and thus, pathological conditions.
 Over-seeking of hyperpalatable foods is suggested to be caused by motivational systems escaping
 homeostatic constraints, supposedly as a result of the inability of internal satiety signals in blocking the
 opioid-based stimulation of DA neurons (M. Zhang & Kelley, 2000). Stimulation of μ-opioid receptors
 in the NAc, for example, is demonstrated to preferentially increase the intake of high-fat food (Glass
 et al., 1996; Zhang & Kelley, 2000), and hyperpalatable foods are shown to trigger potent release of
 DA into the NAc (Nestler, 2001). Moreover, stimulation of the brain reward circuitry (Will et al., 2006),
 as well as DA receptor agonists (Cornelius et al., 2010) are shown to induce hedonic overeating long
 after energy requirements are met, suggesting the hyper-palatability factor to be drive-independent.
 Motivated by these neurobiological findings, one way to formulate the overriding of the homeo-
 static satiety signals by hyperpalatable foods is to assume that the drive-reduction reward for these
 outcomes is augmented by a drive-independent term, T (T > 0 for palatable foods, and T = 0 for ‘nor-
 mal’ foods):
 r (Ht ,K t ) = D (Ht ) – D (Ht + K t ) + T (11)

 In other words, even when the setpoint is reached and thus, the drive-reduction effect of food is
 zero or even negative, the term T overrides this signal and results in further motivation for eating (See
 ‘Materials and methods’ for alternative formulations of Equation 11). Simulating this hypothesis shows
 that when a deprived agent (initial internal state = −50) is given access to normal food, the internal
 state converges to the setpoint (Figure 10C). When hyperpalatable food with equal caloric content
 (K is the same for both types of food) is made available instead, the steady level of the internal state
 goes beyond the setpoint (Figure 10C). Moreover, the total consumption of food is higher in the latter
 case (Figure 8D), reflecting overeating. In fact, the inflated hedonic aspect of the hyperpalatable food
 causes it to be sought and consumed to a certain extent, even after metabolic demands are fulfilled.
 One might speculate that such persistent overshoot would result in excess energy storage, potentially
 leading to obesity.
 Simulating the model in another condition where the agent has ‘concurrent’ access to both types
 of foods shows significant preference of the hyperpalatable food over the normal food (Figure 10E),
 and the internal state again converges to a higher-than-setpoint level (Figure 10F). This is in agree-
 ment with the evidence showing that animals strongly prefer highly palatable to less palatable foods
 (McCrory et al., 2002). (See Figure 10—source data 1 for simulation details)

 Relationship to classical drive-reduction theory
 Our model is inspired by the drive reduction theory of motivation, initially proposed by Clark Hull
 (Hull, 1943), which became the dominant theory of motivation in psychology during the 1940s and
 1950s. However, major criticisms have been leveled against this theory over the years (McFarland,
 1969; Savage, 2000; Berridge, 2004; Speakman et al., 2011). Here we propose that our formal theory
 alleviates some of major faults of the classical drive-reduction. Firstly, the classical drive-reduction
 does not explain anticipatory responding in which animals paradoxically voluntarily increase (rather
 than decrease) their drive deviation, even in the absence of any physiological deficit. As we demon-
 strated, such apparently maladaptive responses are optimal in terms of both reward-seeking and
 ensuring physiological stability, and are thus acquired by animals.
 Secondly, the drive reduction could not explain how secondary reinforcers (e.g., money, or a light
 that predicts food) gain motivational value, since they do not reduce the drive per se. Because our
 framework integrates an RL module with the HR reward computation, the drive reduction-induced
 reward of primary reinforcers can be readily transferred through the learning process to secondary
 reinforcers that predict them (i.e., Pavlovian conditioning) as well as to behavioral policies that lead to
 them (i.e., instrumental conditioning).
 Finally, the original Hull's theory is in contradiction with the fact that intravenous injection of food
 is not rewarding, despite its drive-reduction effect. As we showed, this could be due to the orosen-
 sory-based approximation mechanism required for computing the reward.
 Despite its limitations (discussed later), we would suggest that our modern re-formulation of the
 drive-reduction theory subject to specific assumptions (i.e., orosensory approximation, connection to
 RL, drive form) can serve as a framework to understand the interaction between internal states and
 motivated behaviors.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 16 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Figure 10. Simulating over-eating of hyperpalatable vs. normal food. (A) The simulated agent can consume normal
 (T = 0) or hyperpalatable (T > 0) food. The nutritional content, K, of both foods are equal. In the single-option task
 (C, D), one group of animals can only choose between normal food and nothing (nul), whereas the other group can
 choose between hyperpalatable food and nothing. Starting the task in a deprived state (initial internal state=−50),
 the internal state of the second, but not the first, group converges to a level above the setpoint (C) and the total
 consumption of food is higher in this group (D). In the multiple-choice task, the agents can choose between normal
 food, hyperpalatable food, and nothing (B). Results show that the hyperpalatable food is preferred over the normal
 food (E) and the internal state is defended at a level beyond the setpoint (F). See Figure 10—source data 1 for
 simulation details.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.025
 The following source data is available for figure 10:
 Source data 1. Free parameters for the over-eating simulations.
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.026


 Relationship to other theoretical models
 Several previous RL-based models have also tried to incorporate the internal state into the computa-
 tion of reward by proposing that reward increases as a linear function of deprivation level. That is,
 r = wr , where r is a constant and w is proportional to the deprivation level.
 Interestingly, a linear approximation of our proposed drive-reduction reward is equivalent to
 assuming that the rewarding value of outcomes is equal to the multiplication of the deprivation
 level and the magnitude of the outcome. In fact, by rewriting Equation 2 for the continuous case we
 will have:


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 17 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 dD (Ht + K t )
 r (Ht , K t ) ≡ (12)
 dK t

 Using Taylor expansion, this reward can be approximated by:

 r (Ht , K t ) ≅ −K t .∇DH (Ht ) + O ∇ 2DH (Ht ) ( ) (13)

 Where ∇ is the gradient operator, and ∇ 2 is the Laplace operator. Thus, a linear approximation of our
 proposed drive-reduction reward is equivalent to assuming that the rewarding value of outcomes is
 linearly proportional to their need-reduction capacity (K t ), as well as a function (the gradient of drive)
 of the deprivation level. In this respect, our framework generalizes and provides a normative basis to
 multiplicative forms of deprivation-modulated reward (e.g., decision field theory (Busemeyer et al.,
 2002), intrinsically motivated RL theory (Singh et al., 2010), and MOTIVATOR theory (Dranias et al.,
 2008)), where reward increases as a linear function of deprivation level. Moreover, those previous
 models cannot account for the non-linearities arising from our model; that is the inhibitory effect of
 irrelevant drives and risk aversion.
 Whether the brain implements a nonlinear drive-reduction reward (as in Equation 2) or a linear
 approximation of it (as in Equation 13) can be examined experimentally. Assuming that an animal is in
 a slightly deprived state (Figure 11A), a linear model predicts that as the magnitude of the outcome
 increases, its rewarding value will increase linearly (Figure 11B). A non-linear reward, however, pre-
 dicts an inverted U-shaped economic utility function (Figure 11B). That is, the rewarding value of a
 large outcome can be negative, if it results in overshooting the setpoint.
 A more recent framework that also uses a multiplicative form of deprivation-modulated reward is
 the incentive salience theory (Berridge, 2012; Zhang et al., 2009). However, in contrast to the pre-
 vious models and our framework, this model assumes that the rewarding value of outcomes and con-
 ditioned stimuli is learned as if the animal is in a reference internal state (ψ = 1). Let's denote this
 reward by r (s ,ψ = 1) for state s. At the time of encountering state s in the future, the animal uses a
 factor, ψ t , related to its current internal state, to modulate the real-time motivation of the animal:
 r (s ,ψ t ) =ψ t .r (s ,ψ = 1). In the case of conditioned tolerance to hypothermic agents, however, heat-
 producing response is motivated at the time of cue presentation, when the hypothermic agent is not
 administered yet. At this time, the animal's internal state is not deviated and thus, the motivational
 element, ψ t, in the incentive salience theory does not provoke the tolerance response. Therefore, in
 our reading and unlike our framework, the incentive salience theory cannot give a computational
 account of anticipatory responding.
 Another approach to integrate responsiveness to both internal and external states appeals to approxi-
 mate inference techniques from statistical physics. The free energy theory of brain (Friston, 2010)
 proposes that organisms optimize their actions in order to minimize ‘surprise’. Surprise is an information-
 theoretic notion measuring how inconceivable it is to the organism to find itself in a certain state. Assume
 that evolutionary pressure has compelled a species to occupy a restricted set of internal states, and p(Ht )
 indicates the probability of occupying state Ht , after the evolution of admissible states has converged
 to an equilibrium density. Surprise is defined as the negative log-probability of Ht occurring; –ln p(Ht ).
 We propose that our notion of drive is equivalent to surprise as utilized in the free energy (Friston,
 2010) and interoceptive inference (Seth, 2013) frameworks. In fact, we propose that an organism has
 an equilibrium density, p (.), with the following functional form:

 – D (Ht ) n
 p (Ht ) ∝ e = e − m ∑Ni =1 hi∗ – hi ,t (14)

 In order to stay faithful to this probability density (and ensure the survival of genes by remaining within
 n
 physiological bounds), the organism minimizes surprise, which is equal to – ln p (Ht ) = m ∑Ni =1 hi∗ – hi ,t .
 This specific form of surprise is equivalent to our definition of drive (Equation 1). The equivalency of
 reward maximization and physiological stability objectives in our model (Equation 5) shows that opti-
 mizing either homeostasis or sum of discounted rewards corresponds to prescribing a principle of least
 action applied to the surprise function.
 Although our homeostatic RL and the free-energy theory are similar in spirit, several major differ-
 ences can be mentioned. Most importantly, the two frameworks should be understood at different


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 18 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 levels of analysis (Marr, 1982): the free-energy
 theory is a computational framework, whereas
 our theory fits in the algorithmic/representational
 level. In the same line, the two theories use dif-
 ferent mathematical tools as their optimization
 techniques. The free energy approach uses vari-
 ational Bayes inference. Thus, rationality in that
 model is bounded by the simplifying assump-
 tions for doing ‘approximate’ inference (namely,
 factorization of the variational distribution over
 some partition of the latent variables, Laplace
 approximation, etc.). Our approach, however,
 depends on tools from optimal control theory
 and thus, rationality is constrained by the capa-
 bilities and weaknesses of the variants of the
 RL algorithm being used (e.g. model-based vs.
 model-free RL). In this sense, while the notion of
 reward is redundant in the free energy formula-
 tion, and physiological stability is achieved through
 gradient descent function, homeostasis in our
 model can only be achieved through computing
 reward. In fact, the associative learning compo-
 nent in our model critically depends on receiving
 the approximated reward from the upstream reg-
 ulatory component. As a result, our model remains
 faithful to and exploits the well-developed condi-
 tioning literature in behavioral psychology, with
 its strengths and weaknesses.
 A further approach toward adaptive homeo-
 static regulation is the predictive homeostasis
 Figure 11. Behavioral predictions of the model. (A) (otherwise known as allostasis) model (Sterling,
 Differential predictions of the multiplicative (linear) and 2012) where the classical negative-feedback
 drive-reduction (non-linear) forms of reward. In our homeostatic model is coupled with an inference
 model, assuming that the internal state is at ht (A), system capable of anticipating forthcoming
 outcomes larger than h* – ht result in overshooting the demands. In this framework, anticipated demands
 setpoint and thus a declining trend of the rewarding increase current homeostatic deviation (by adjust-
 value (B). Previous models, however, predict the ing the setpoint level) and thus, prepare the
 rewarding value to increase linearly as the outcome
 organism to meet the predicted need. Again,
 increases in magnitude. (C) Our model predicts that
 the concept of reward is redundant in this model
 when given a choice between two options with equal
 and motivated behaviors are directly controlled
 net effects on the internal state, animals choose the
 option that first results in reducing the homeostatic by homeostatic deviation, rather than by a priori
 deviation and then is followed by an increase in computed and reinforced rewarding values.
 deviation (green), as compared to a reversed-order As alternative to the homeostatic regulation
 option (red). theories phrased around maintenance of set-
 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.027 points, another theoretical approach toward
 modeling regulatory systems is the ‘settling point’
 theory (Wirtshafter & Davis, 1977; Berridge,
 2004; Müller et al., 2010; Speakman et al., 2011). According to this theory, by viewing organisms as
 dynamical systems, what looks like a homeostatic setpoint is just the stable state of the system caused
 by a balance of different opposing effectors on the internal variables. However, one should notice that
 mathematically, such dynamical systems can be re-formulated as a homeostatically regulated system,
 by writing down a potential functional for the system (or an energy function). Such an energy function
 is equivalent to our drive function whose setpoint corresponds to the settling point of the dynamical
 system formulation. Thus, there is equivalence between the two methods, and the setpoint approach
 summarizes the outcome of the underlying dynamical system on the regulated variables. Note that
 nothing precludes our framework to treat the setpoint conceptually as maintained internally by an


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 19 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 underlying system of effectors and regulators. However, the setpoint/drive-function formulation con-
 veniently allows us to derive our normative theory.

 Predictions
 Here we list the testable predictions of our theory, some of which put our model to test against alter-
 native proposals. Firstly, as mentioned before (Figure 9), our theory predicts that the oral vs. fistula
 proportion in the water self-administration task (McFarland, 1969) affects the speed of satiation: the
 higher the oral portion is, the faster the setpoint will be reached.
 Secondly, as discussed before, our model predicts an inverted U-shaped utility function (Figure 11A,B).
 This is in contrast to the multiplicative formulations of deprivation-modulated reward.
 Thirdly, our model predicts that if animals are offered with two outcomes where one outcome
 reduces the homeostatic deviation and the other increases the deviation, the animal chooses to first
 take the deviation-reducing and then the deviation-increasing outcome (Figure 11C, green sequence),
 but not the other way around (Figure 11C, red sequence). This is due to the fact that future deviations
 (and rewards) are discounted. Thus, the animal tries to postpone further deviations and expedite
 drive-reducing outcomes.
 Fourthly, as explained earlier, we predict that animals are capable of learning not only Pavlovian,
 but also instrumental anticipatory responding. This is in contrast to the prediction of the predictive
 homeostasis theory (Woods & Ramsay, 2007; Sterling, 2012; Stephen C ).
 Finally, our theory predicts that upon reducing the magnitude of the outcome, a transitory burst of
 responding should be observed. We simulate both our model (Figure 12, left) and classical homeo-
 static regulation models (Figure 12, right) in an artificial environment where pressing a lever results
 in the agent receiving a big outcome (1 g) during the first hour, and a significantly smaller outcome
 (0.125 g) during the second hour of the experiment. According to the classical models, the corrective
 response (lever-press) is performed when the internal state drops below the setpoint. Thus, during the
 first hour, the agent responds with a stable rate (Figure 12E,F) in order maintain the internal state
 above the setpoint (Figure 12D). Upon decreasing the dose, the agent waits until the internal state
 again drops below the setpoint. Thereafter, the agent presses the lever with a new rate, corresponding
 to the new dose. Therefore, according to this class of models, response rate switches from a stable low
 level to a stable high level, with no burst phase in between (Figure 12F).
 According to our model, however, when the unit dose decreases from 1 g to 0.125 g, the agent
 requires at least some new experiences with the outcome in order to realize that this change has hap-
 pened (i.e., in order to update the expected outcome associated with every action). Thus, right after the
 dose is decreased, the agent still expects to receive a big outcome upon pressing the lever. Therefore,
 as the objective is to minimize deviation from the setpoint (rather that staying above the setpoint), the
 agent waits for a period equal to the normal inter-infusion interval of the 1 g unit-dose. During this
 period, the internal state reaches the same lower bound as in previous trials (Figure 12A). Afterward,
 when the agent presses the lever for the first time, it receives an unexpectedly small outcome, which
 is not sufficient for reaching the setpoint. Thus, several further responses will be needed to reach the
 setpoint, resulting in a burst of responding after decreasing the unit dose (Figure 12B,C). After the set-
 point is achieved, the agent presses the lever with a lower (-than-burst) rate, in order to keep the internal
 state close to the setpoint. In sum, in contrast to the classical HR models, our theory predicts a temporary
 burst of self-administration after dose reduction (See Figure 12—source data 1 for simulation details).

 Limitations and future directions
 From an evolutionary perspective, physiological stability and thus survival may themselves be seen as
 means of guaranteeing reproduction. These intermediate objectives can be even violated in specific
 conditions and be replaced with parental sacrifice. Still, we believe that homeostatic maintenance can
 explain a significant proportion of motivated behaviors in animals. It is also noteworthy that our theory
 only applies to rewards that have a corresponding regulatory system. How to extend our theory to
 rewards without a corresponding homeostatic regulation system (e.g., social rewards, novelty-induced
 reward, etc.) remains a key challenge for the future.
 In order to put forth our formal theory we had to put forward several key constraints and assump-
 tions. As further future directions, one could relax several constraining assumptions of our formal setup
 of the theory. For example, redesigning the model in a partially observable condition (as opposed to the
 fully-observable setup we used) where the internal state observation is susceptible to noise could have


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 20 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


Figure 12. Simulation results, predicting a transitory burst of responding upon reducing the dose of outcome. Our model (left column) and negative-
feedback models (right column) are simulated is a process where responding yields big and small outcomes, during the first and second hours of the
experiment, respectively. In our model, the objective is to stay as close as possible to the setpoint (A), whereas in previous homeostatic regulation models,
the objective is to stay above the setpoint (D). Thus, our model predicts a short-term burst of responding after the dose reduction, followed by regular
and escalated response rate (B, C). Classical HR models, however, predict an immediate transition from a steady low to a steady high response rate
(E, F). See Figure 12—figure supplements 1 and Figure 12—source data 1 for simulation details.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.028
The following source data and figure supplements are available for figure 12:
Source data 1. Free parameters for the within-session dose-change simulation.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.029
Figure supplement 1. The Markov Decision Process used for the within-session dose-change simulation.
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811.030


 important implications for understanding some psychiatric diseases and self-perception distortion dis-
 orders, such as anorexia nervosa. Also, relaxing the assumption that the setpoint is fixed and making it
 adaptive to the animal's experiences could explain tolerance (as elevated perception of desired setpoint)
 and thus, drug addiction and obesity. Furthermore, relaxing the restrictive functional form of the drive
 function and introducing more general forms could explain behavioral patterns that our model does
 not yet account for, like asymmetric risk-aversion toward gains vs. losses (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979).

 Conclusion
 In a nutshell, our theory incorporates a formal physiological definition of primary rewards into a novel
 homeostatically regulated reinforcement learning theory, allowing us to prove that economically
 rational behaviors ensure physiological integrity. Being inspired by the classic drive-reduction theory
 of motivation, our mathematical treatment allows for quantitative results to be obtained, predictions
 that make the theory testable, and logical coherence. The theory, with its set of formal assumptions
 and proofs, does not purport to explain the full gamut of animal behavior, yet we believe it to be a
 credible step toward developing a coherent mathematical framework to understand behaviors that


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 21 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 depend on motivations stemming from internal states and needs of the individual. Furthermore, this
 work puts forth a meta-hypothesis that a number of apparently irrational behaviors regain their ration-
 ality if the internal state of the individual is taken into account. Among others, the relationship between
 our learning-based theory and evolutionary processes that shape animal a priori preferences and influ-
 ence behavioral patterns remains a key challenge.

 Materials and methods
 Rationality of the theory
 Here we show analytically that maximizing rewards and minimizing deviations from the setpoint are
 equivalent objective functions.

 Definition:
 A ‘homeostatic trajectory’, denoted by p = {K 0 ,K 1,K 2 ,…}, is an ordered sequence of transitions in the
 v -dimensional homeostatic space. Each K i is a v -dimensional vector, determining the length and direction
 of one transition. We also define P (H0 ) as the set of all trajectories that if start from H0, will end up at H *.

 Definition:
 For each homeostatic trajectory p that starts from the initial motivational state H0 and consists of w
 elements, we define SDD p (H0 ) as the ‘sum of discounted drives’ through that trajectory:
 w –1
 SDDp (H0 ) = ∑ γ t .D (Ht +1 ) (S1)
 t =0


 Where γ is the discount factor, and D(.) is the drive function. Also, starting from H0, the internal state
 evolves by Ht +1 = Ht + K t .

 Definition:
 Similarly, for each homeostatic trajectory p that starts from the initial motivational state H0 and consists
 of m elements, we define SDR p (H0 ) as the ‘sum of discounted rewards’ through that trajectory:

 SDR p (H0 ) = ∑ γ t .rt = ∑ γ t . (D (Ht ) – D (Ht +1 ))
 w –1 w –1
 (S2)
 t =0 t =0


 Proposition:
 For any initial state H0, if γ < 1, we will have:

 argmin SDDp (H0 ) = argmax SDRp (H0 ) (S3)
 p ∈ P (H 0 ) p ∈P (H0 )


 Roughly, this means that a policy that minimizes deviation from the setpoint, also maximizes acqui-
 sition of reward, and vice versa.

 Proof:
 Assume that pi ∈P (H0 ) is a sample trajectory consisting of w i transitions. As a result of these transi-
 tions, the internal state will take a sequence like: {Hi ,0 = H0 ,Hi ,1,Hi ,2 ,…,Hi ,w = H * }. Denoting D (H x ) by
 D X for the sake of simplicity in notation, the drive value will take the following sequence:
 {Di ,0 = D0 ,Di ,1,Di ,2 ,… , Di ,w = D * = 0}. We have:

 SDD pi (H0 ) = Di ,1 + γ .Di ,2 + γ 2 .Di ,3 + … + γ w –1.D * (S4)

 We also have:

 SDR pi (H0 ) = ri ,0 + γ .ri ,1 + γ 2 .ri ,2 + … + γ w –1.ri ,w –1
 (
 = (D0 – Di ,1 ) + γ . (Di ,1 – Di ,2 ) + γ 2 . (Di ,2 – Di ,3 ) + … + γ w –1. Di ,w –1 – D * )
 (
 = D0 + (γ – 1) . Di ,1 + γ .Di ,2 + γ .Di ,3 + … + γ
 2 w –2
 .Di ,w –1 )
 = D0 + (γ – 1) . SDD pi (H0 ) (S5)


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 22 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience


 Since D0 has a fixed value and γ – 1< 0 , it can be concluded that if a certain trajectory from P (H0 )
 maximizes SDR (H0 ), it will also minimize SDD (H0 ), and vice versa. Thus, the trajectories that satisfy
 these two objectives are identical.

 Hyper-palatability effect
 For the especial case that m/n = 1, Equation 11 can be rewritten as follows:

 r (Ht , K t ) = D (Ht ) – D (Ht + K t ) + T
 = (Ht – H * ) – (Ht + K t – H * ) + T
 2 2


  T   T 
 2 2
  
 = Ht – H * +  – Ht + K t – H * + 
   2K t    2K t  (S6)

 This means that the effect of T is equivalent to having a simple HRL system (without term T) whose
 T
 drive function is shifted such that the new setpoint is equal to H * + , where H * is the setpoint of the
 2K t
 original system. This predicts that the bigger the hyper-palatability factor T is, the higher the new
 steady state is, and the higher the real nutritional content K t of the food outcome is, the less diver-
 gence of the new setpoint from the original setpoint is.
 Equation 5 can also be re-written as:

 r (Ht , K t ) = D (Ht ) – D (Ht + K t ) + T
 = (Ht – H * ) – (Ht + K t – H * ) + T
 2 2


    
 2 2
 T  
 = Ht –  – H *  – Ht – *
 T 
 + K t
  – H
  2K 
 t   2K t   (S7)

 This can be interpreted as the effect of T being equivalent to a simple HRL system (without term T)
 whose internal state Ht is underestimated by T units. That is, hyper-palatability makes the behavior
 2K t
 look like as if the subject is hungrier than what they really are.

 Acknowledgments
 We thank Peter Dayan, Amir Dezfouli, Serge Ahmed, and Mathias Pessiglione for critical discussions,
 and Peter Dayan and Oliver Hulme for commenting on the manuscript. The authors acknowledge
 partial funding from ANR-10-LABX-0087 IEC (BSG), ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL* (BSG), CNRS (BSG),
 INSERM (BSG), and FRM (MK). Support from the Basic Research Program of the National Research
 University Higher School of Economics is gratefully acknowledged by BSG.


 Additional information
 Funding
 Funder Grant reference number Author
 Gatsby Charitable Foundation Mehdi Keramati
 National Research University Basic Research Program Boris Gutkin
 Higher School of Economics
 Institut national de la santé et de INSERM U960, France Boris Gutkin
 la recherche médicale
 Center for Research and Frontiers du Vivant Mehdi Keramati
 Interdisciplinary
 Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-10-LABX-0087 IEC, Boris Gutkin
 France


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 23 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 Funder Grant reference number Author
 Agence Nationale de la Recherche ANR-10-IDEX-0001-02 PSL, Boris Gutkin
 France

 The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the
 decision to submit the work for publication.


 Author contributions
 MK, Doing simulations, Deriving analytical proofs, Conception and design, Analysis and interpretation
 of data, Drafting or revising the article; BG, Discussing the results, Drafting or revising the article


 References
 Barbano MF, Le Saux M, Cador M. 2009. Involvement of dopamine and opioids in the motivation to eat:
 influence of palatability, homeostatic state, and behavioral paradigms. Psychopharmacology 203:475–487.
 doi: 10.1007/s00213-008-1390-6.
 Beeler JA, McCutcheon JE, Cao ZF, Murakami M, Alexander E, Roitman MF, Zhuang X. 2012. Taste uncoupled
 from nutrition fails to sustain the reinforcing properties of food. The European Journal of Neuroscience
 36:2533–2546. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.08167.x.
 Bernard C. 1957. Lectures on the physiological properties and the pathological alternations of the liquids of the
 organism: Third lecture. In Langley LL. Editors. Homeostasis: Origins of the concept, 1973. Stroudsberg, PA:
 Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, Inc. p. 89–100.
 Berridge KC. 2004. Motivation concepts in behavioral neuroscience. Physiology & Behavior 81:179–209.
 doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2004.02.004.
 Berridge KC. 2012. From prediction error to incentive salience: mesolimbic computation of reward motivation.
 The European Journal of Neuroscience 35:1124–1143. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2012.07990.x.
 Breslin PA. 2013. An evolutionary perspective on food and human taste. Current Biology 23:R409–R418.
 doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.04.010.
 Burdakov D, Gerasimenko O, Verkhratsky A. 2005. Physiological changes in glucose differentially modulate the
 excitability of hypothalamic melanin-concentrating hormone and orexin neurons in situ. The Journal of
 Neuroscience 25:2429–2433. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4925-04.2005.
 Busemeyer JR, Townsend JT, Stout JC. 2002. Motivational underpinnings of utility in decision making: decision
 field theory analysis of deprivation and satiation. In Moore S, Oaksford M, Editors. Emotional cognition: from
 brain to behaviour. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. p. 197–218.
 Cabanac M. 1971. Physiological role of Pleasure. Science 173:1103–1107. doi: 10.1126/science.173.4002.1103.
 Cannon WB. 1929. Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiological Reviews 9:399–431.
 Chung SH, Herrnstein RJ. 1967. Choice and delay of reinforcement. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of
 Behavior 10:67–74. doi: 10.1901/jeab.1967.10-67.
 Cleary J, Weldon DT, O'Hare E, Billington C, Levine AS. 1996. Naloxone effects on sucrose-motivated behavior.
 Psychopharmacology 126:110–114. doi: 10.1007/BF02246345.
 Conant RC, Ashby WR. 1970. Every good regulator of a system must be a model of that system. International
 Journal of Systems Science 1:89–97.
 Cornelius JR, Tippmann-Peikert M, Slocumb NL, Frerichs CF, Silber MH. 2010. Impulse control disorders with the
 use of dopaminergic agents in restless legs syndrome: a case-control study. Sleep 33:81–87.
 de Araujo IE, Oliveira-Maia AJ, Sotnikova TD, Gainetdinov RR, Caron MG, Nicolelis MAL, Simon SA. 2008. Food
 reward in the absence of taste receptor signaling. Neuron 57:930–941. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.01.032.
 Devine DP, Leone P, Wise RA. 1993. Mesolimbic dopamine neurotransmission is increased by administration
 of mu-opioid receptor antagonists. European Journal of Pharmacology 243:55–64. doi: 10.1016/
 0014-2999(93)90167-G.
 Dickinson A, Balleine BW. 2002. The role of learning in motivation. In Gallistel CR, Editor. Volume 3 of Steven's
 Handbook of experimental psychology: learning, motivation, and Emotion. 3rd edition. New York: Wiley.
 p. 497–533.
 Doyle TG, Berridge KC, Gosnell BA. 1993. Morphine enhances hedonic taste palatability in rats. Pharmacology,
 Biochemistry, and Behavior 46:745–749. doi: 10.1016/0091-3057(93)90572-B.
 Dranias MR, Grossberg S, Bullock D. 2008. Dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic value systems in conditioning
 and outcome-specific revaluation. Brain Research 1238:239–287. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.07.013.
 Friston K. 2010. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11:127–138.
 doi: 10.1038/nrn2787.
 Glass MJ, Grace M, Cleary JP, Billington CJ, Levine AS. 1996. Potency of naloxone's anorectic effect in rats is
 dependent on diet preference. The American Journal of Physiology 271:R217–R221.
 Hjeresen DL, Reed DR, Woods SC. 1986. Tolerance to hypothermia induced by ethanol depends on specific drug
 effects. Psychopharmacology 89:45–51. doi: 10.1007/BF00175187.
 Hodos W. 1961. Progressive ratio as a measure of reward strength. Science 134:943–944. doi: 10.1126/
 science.134.3483.943.
 Hull CL. 1943. Principles of behavior: an introduction to behavior theory. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 24 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 Kahneman D, Tversky A. 1979. Prospect theory: an Analysis of Decision under risk. Econometrica 47:263–291.
 doi: 10.2307/1914185.
 Korotkova TM, Sergeeva OA, Eriksson KS, Haas HL, Brown RE. 2003. Excitation of ventral tegmental area
 dopaminergic and nondopaminergic neurons by orexins/hypocretins. The Journal of Neuroscience 23:7–11.
 Mansfield JG, Benedict RS, Woods SC. 1983. Response specificity of behaviorally augmented tolerance to
 ethanol supports a learning interpretation. Psychopharmacology 79:94–98. doi: 10.1007/BF00427791.
 Mansfield JG, Cunningham CL. 1980. Conditioning and extinction of tolerance to the hypothermic effect of
 ethanol in rats. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 94:962–969. doi: 10.1037/h0077824.
 Marieb EN, Hoehn K. 2012. Human Anatomy & Physiology. 9th edition. Benjamin Cummings. p. 1264.
 Marr D. 1982. Vision. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
 Mas-Colell A, Whinston MD, Green JR. 1995. Microeconomic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
 McCrory MA, Suen VMM, Roberts SB. 2002. Biobehavioral influences on energy intake and adult weight gain.
 The Journal of Nutrition 132:3830S–3834S.
 McFarland D. 1969. Separation of satiating and rewarding consequences of drinking. Physiology & Behavior
 4:987–989. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(69)90054-7.
 Miller NE, Kessen ML. 1952. Reward effects of food via stomach fistula compared with those of food via mouth.
 Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology 45:555–564. doi: 10.1037/h0060113.
 Mowrer OH. 1960. Learning theory and behavior. New York: Wiley.
 Müller MJ, Bosy-Westphal A, Heymsfield SB. 2010. Is there evidence for a set point that regulates human body
 weight? F1000 Medicine Reports 2:59. doi: 10.3410/M2-59.
 Narita M, Nagumo Y, Hashimoto S, Narita M, Khotib J, Miyatake M, Sakurai T, Yanagisawa M, Nakamachi T,
 Shioda S, Suzuki T. 2006. Direct involvement of orexinergic systems in the activation of the mesolimbic
 dopamine pathway and related behaviors induced by morphine. The Journal of neuroscience 26:398–405.
 doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2761-05.2006.
 Nestler EJ. 2001. Molecular basis of long-term plasticity underlying addiction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience
 2:119–128. doi: 10.1038/35053570.
 Noel MB, Wise RA. 1993. Ventral tegmental injections of morphine but not U-50,488H enhance feeding in
 food-deprived rats. Brain Research 632:68–73. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)91139-J.
 Palmiter RD. 2007. Is dopamine a physiologically relevant mediator of feeding behavior? Trends in
 Neurosciences 30:375–381. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2007.06.004.
 Rangel A. 2013. Regulation of dietary choice by the decision-making circuitry. Nature Neuroscience 16:
 1717–1724. doi: 10.1038/nn.3561.
 Rangel A, Camerer C, Montague PR. 2008. A framework for studying the neurobiology of value-based decision
 making. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9:545–556. doi: 10.1038/nrn2357.
 Ren X, Ferreira JG, Zhou L, Shammah-Lagnado SJ, Yeckel CW, de Araujo IE. 2010. Nutrient selection in the absence
 of taste receptor signaling. The Journal of Neuroscience 30:8012–8023. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5749-09.2010.
 Rodgers RJ, Halford JC, Nunes de Souza RL, Canto de Souza AL, Piper DC, Arch JR, Upton N, Porter RA,
 Johns A, Blundell JE. 2001. SB-334867, a selective orexin-1 receptor antagonist, enhances behavioural satiety
 and blocks the hyperphagic effect of orexin-A in rats. The European Journal of Neuroscience 13:1444–1452.
 doi: 10.1046/j.0953-816x.2001.01518.x.
 Rolls ET. 2007. Understanding the mechanisms of food intake and obesity. Obesity Reviews 8:67–72. doi: 10.1111/
 j.1467-789X.2007.00321.x.
 Sakurai T, Amemiya A, Ishii M, Matsuzaki I, Chemelli RM, Tanaka H, Williams SC, Richardson JA, Kozlowski GP,
 Wilson S, Arch JR, Buckingham RE, Haynes AC, Carr SA, Annan RS, McNulty DE, Liu WS, Terrett JA,
 Elshourbagy NA, Bergsma DJ, Yanagisawa M. 1998. Orexins and orexin receptors: a family of hypothalamic
 neuropeptides and G protein-coupled receptors that regulate feeding behavior. Cell 92:573–585. doi: 10.1016/
 S0092-8674(00)80949-6.
 Sanger DJ, McCarthy PS. 1980. Differential effects of morphine on food and water intake in food deprived and
 freely-feeding rats. Psychopharmacology 72:103–106. doi: 10.1007/BF00433813.
 Savage T. 2000. Artificial motives: A review of motivation in artificial creatures. Connection Science 12:211–277.
 doi: 10.1080/095400900750060131.
 Schneider LH. 1989. Orosensory self-stimulation by sucrose involves brain dopaminergic mechanisms. Annals of
 the New York Academy of Sciences 575:307–319. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1989.tb53252.x.
 Schultz W, Dayan P, Montague PR. 1997. A neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science 275:1593–1599.
 doi: 10.1126/science.275.5306.1593.
 Seth AK. 2013. Interoceptive inference, emotion, and the embodied self. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 17:
 565–573. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007.
 Sibly RM, McFarland DJ. 1974. State Space Approach to Motivation, Motivational Control System Analysis.
 Academic Press.
 Singh S, Lewis RL, Barto AG, Sorg J. 2010. Intrinsically motivated reinforcement learning: an evolutionary perspec-
 tive. IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development 2:70–82. doi: 10.1109/TAMD.2010.2051031.
 Skjoldager P, Pierre PJ, Mittleman G. 1993. Reinforcer Magnitude and progressive ratio Responding in the rat:
 Effects of increased Effort, Prefeeding, and extinction. Learning and Motivation 24:303–343. doi: 10.1006/
 lmot.1993.1019.
 Solinas M, Goldberg SR. 2005. Motivational effects of cannabinoids and opioids on food reinforcement depend
 on simultaneous activation of cannabinoid and opioid systems. Neuropsychopharmacology 30:2035–2045.
 doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300720.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 25 of 26
 Research article Neuroscience

 Speakman JR, Levitsky DA, Allison DB, Bray MS, de Castro JM, Clegg DJ, Clapham JC, Dulloo AG, Gruer L,
 Haw S, Hebebrand J, Hetherington MM, Higgs S, Jebb SA, Loos RJ, Luckman S, Luke A, Mohammed-Ali V,
 O'Rahilly S, Pereira M, Perusse L, Robinson TN, Rolls B, Symonds ME, Westerterp-Plantenga MS. 2011.
 Set points, settling points and some alternative models: theoretical options to understand how genes and
 environments combine to regulate body adiposity. Disease Models & Mechanisms 4:733–745. doi: 10.1242/
 dmm.008698.
 Spence KW. 1956. Behavior theory and conditioning. Westport: Greenwood Press.
 Sterling P. 2012. Allostasis: a model of predictive regulation. Physiology & Behavior 106:5–15. doi: 10.1016/j.
 physbeh.2011.06.004.
 Sutton RS, Barto AG. 1998. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Swithers SE, Baker CR, Davidson TL. 2009. General and persistent effects of high-intensity sweeteners on body
 weight gain and caloric compensation in rats. Behavioral Neuroscience 123:772–780. doi: 10.1037/a0016139.
 Swithers SE, Martin AA, Davidson TL. 2010. High-intensity sweeteners and energy balance. Physiology &
 Behavior 100:55–62. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.12.021.
 Will MJ, Pratt WE, Kelley AE. 2006. Pharmacological characterization of high-fat feeding induced by opioid
 stimulation of the ventral striatum. Physiology & Behavior 89:226–234. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2006.06.008.
 Williams KW, Elmquist JK. 2012. From neuroanatomy to behavior: central integration of peripheral signals
 regulating feeding behavior. Nature Neuroscience 15:1350–1355. doi: 10.1038/nn.3217.
 Wirtshafter D, Davis JD. 1977. Set points, settling points, and the control of body weight. Physiology & Behavior
 19:75–78. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(77)90162-7.
 Woods SC. 1991. The eating paradox: how we tolerate food. Psychological Review 98:488–505. doi: 10.1037/
 0033-295X.98.4.488.
 Woods SC, Seeley RJ. 2002. Hunger and energy homeostasis. In Gallistel CR. Editor. Volume 3 of Steven's
 Handbook of experimental psychology: learning, motivation, and Emotion. 3rd edition. New York: Wiley.
 p. 633–668.
 Woods SC, Ramsay DS. 2007. Homeostasis: beyond Curt Richter. Appetite 49:388–398. doi: 10.1016/j.
 appet.2006.09.015.
 Yeo GS, Heisler LK. 2012. Unraveling the brain regulation of appetite: lessons from genetics. Nature
 Neuroscience 15:1343–1349. doi: 10.1038/nn.3211.
 Yeomans MR, Wright P. 1991. Lower pleasantness of palatable foods in nalmefene-treated human volunteers.
 Appetite 16:249–259. doi: 10.1016/0195-6663(91)90062-W.
 Zhang J, Berridge KC, Tindell AJ, Smith KS, Aldridge JW. 2009. A neural computational Model of incentive
 salience. PLOS Computational Biology 5:e1000437. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000437.
 Zhang M, Kelley AE. 1997. Opiate agonists microinjected into the nucleus accumbens enhance sucrose drinking
 in rats. Psychopharmacology 132:350–360. doi: 10.1007/s002130050355.
 Zhang M, Kelley AE. 2000. Enhanced intake of high-fat food following striatal mu-opioid stimulation: microinjec-
 tion mapping and fos expression. Neuroscience 99:267–277. doi: 10.1016/S0306-4522(00)00198-6.


Keramati and Gutkin. eLife 2014;3:e04811. DOI: 10.7554/eLife.04811 26 of 26