Nature Reviews Neuroscience | Aop, published online 13 January 2010; doi:10.1038/nrn2787 REVIEWS


 The free-energy principle:
 a unified brain theory?
 Karl Friston
 Abstract | A free-energy principle has been proposed recently that accounts for action,
 perception and learning. This Review looks at some key brain theories in the biological (for
 example, neural Darwinism) and physical (for example, information theory and optimal
 control theory) sciences from the free-energy perspective. Crucially, one key theme runs
 through each of these theories — optimization. Furthermore, if we look closely at what is
 optimized, the same quantity keeps emerging, namely value (expected reward, expected
 utility) or its complement, surprise (prediction error, expected cost). This is the quantity that
 is optimized under the free-energy principle, which suggests that several global brain
 theories might be unified within a free-energy framework.


Free energy
 Despite the wealth of empirical data in neuroscience, Motivation: resisting a tendency to disorder. The
An information theory measure there are relatively few global theories about how the defining characteristic of biological systems is that
that bounds or limits (by being brain works. A recently proposed free-energy principle they maintain their states and form in the face of a
greater than) the surprise on for adaptive systems tries to provide a unified account constantly changing environment 3–6. From the point
sampling some data, given a
 of action, perception and learning. Although this prin- of view of the brain, the environment includes both
generative model.
 ciple has been portrayed as a unified brain theory 1, its the external and the internal milieu. This maintenance
Homeostasis capacity to unify different perspectives on brain function of order is seen at many levels and distinguishes bio-
The process whereby an open has yet to be established. This Review attempts to place logical from other self-organizing systems; indeed, the
or closed system regulates its some key theories within the free-energy framework, in physiology of biological systems can be reduced almost
internal environment to
maintain its states within
 the hope of identifying common themes. I first review entirely to their homeostasis7. More precisely, the rep-
bounds. the free-energy principle and then deconstruct several ertoire of physiological and sensory states in which an
 global brain theories to show how they all speak to the organism can be is limited, and these states define the
Entropy same underlying idea. organism’s phenotype. Mathematically, this means that
The average surprise of
 the probability of these (interoceptive and exterocep-
outcomes sampled from a
probability distribution or
 The free-energy principle tive) sensory states must have low entropy; in other
density. A density with low The free-energy principle (BOX 1) says that any self- words, there is a high probability that a system will
entropy means that, on organizing system that is at equilibrium with its environ- be in any of a small number of states, and a low prob-
average, the outcome is ment must minimize its free energy 2. The principle is ability that it will be in the remaining states. Entropy
relatively predictable. Entropy
is therefore a measure of
 essentially a mathematical formulation of how adaptive is also the average self information or ‘ surprise ’ 8
uncertainty. systems (that is, biological agents, like animals or brains) (more formally, it is the negative log-probability of an
 resist a natural tendency to disorder 3–6. What follows is outcome). Here, ‘a fish out of water’ would be in a sur-
 a non-mathematical treatment of the motivation and prising state (both emotionally and mathematically).
 implications of the principle. We will see that although the A fish that frequently forsook water would have high
 motivation is quite straightforward, the implications are entropy. Note that both surprise and entropy depend
The Wellcome Trust Centre
 complicated and diverse. This diversity allows the prin- on the agent: what is surprising for one agent (for
for Neuroimaging,
University College London, ciple to account for many aspects of brain structure and example, being out of water) may not be surprising
Queen Square, London, function and lends it the potential to unify different per- for another. Biological agents must therefore mini-
WC1N 3BG, UK. spectives on how the brain works. In subsequent sections, mize the long-term average of surprise to ensure that
e‑mail: I discuss how the principle can be applied to neuronal their sensory entropy remains low. In other words,
k.friston@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk
doi:10.1038/nrn2787
 systems as viewed from these perspectives. This Review biological systems somehow manage to violate the
Published online starts in a rather abstract and technical way but then tries fluctuation theorem, which generalizes the second law
13 January 2010 to unpack the basic idea in more familiar terms. of thermodynamics9.


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 1

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS

 Box 1 | The free-energy principle
 Part a of the figure shows the dependencies among the a
 quantities that define free energy. These include the
 Environment Agent
 internal states of the brain μ(t) and quantities describing its
 exchange with the environment: sensory signals (and their Sensations
 motion) s̃(t) = [s,s′,s″…]T plus action a(t). The environment s~ = g(x~, ϑ) + z~
 is described by equations of motion, which specify the
 trajectory of its hidden states. The causes ϑ ⊃ {x̃, θ, γ } of
 External states Internal states
 sensory input comprise hidden states x̃(t), parameters θ
 and precisions γ controlling the amplitude of the random ẋ~ = f(x~, a, ϑ) + w~ μ = arg min F(s~, μ)
 fluctuations z̃(t) and w̃(t). Internal brain states and action
 minimize free energy F(s̃,μ), which is a function of sensory Action or control signals
 input and a probabilistic representation q(ϑ|μ) of its causes.
 a = arg min F(s~, μ)
 This representation is called the recognition density and is
 encoded by internal states μ.
 The free energy depends on two probability densities:
 b
 the recognition density q(ϑ|μ) and one that generates Free-energy bound on surprise
 sensory samples and their causes, p(s̃,ϑ|m). The latter F = −<ln p(s~, ϑ | m)> + <ln q(ϑ | μ)>
 q q
 represents a probabilistic generative model (denoted by
 m), the form of which is entailed by the agent or brain. Action minimizes prediction errors
 Part b of the figure provides alternative expressions for the F = D(q(ϑ | μ) || p(ϑ)) − <ln p(s~ (a) | ϑ, m)> q
 free energy to show what its minimization entails: action
 can reduce free energy only by increasing accuracy (that is, a = arg max Accuracy
 selectively sampling data that are predicted). Conversely,
 optimizing brain states makes the representation an Perception optimizes predictions
 approximate conditional density on the causes of sensory F = D(q(ϑ | μ) || p(ϑ | s~ )) − ln p(s~ | m)
Surprise
(Surprisal or self information.)
 input. This enables action to avoid surprising sensory μ = arg max Divergence
The negative log-probability of encounters. A more formal description is provided below.
an outcome. An improbable optimizing the sufficient statistics (representations)
outcome (for example, water Optimizing the recognition density makes it a posterior or conditional density on the causes of Nature Reviews
 sensory Neuroscience
 data:| this can be
flowing uphill) is therefore
 seen by expressing the free energy as surprise –In p(s̃,| m) plus a Kullback-Leibler divergence between the recognition and
surprising.
 conditional densities (encoded by the ‘internal states’ in the figure). Because this difference is always positive, minimizing
Fluctuation theorem free energy makes the recognition density an approximate posterior probability. This means the agent implicitly infers or
(A term from statistical represents the causes of its sensory samples in a Bayes-optimal fashion. At the same time, the free energy becomes a tight
mechanics.) Deals with the bound on surprise, which is minimized through action.
probability that the entropy optimizing action
of a system that is far from the
 Acting on the environment by minimizing free energy enforces a sampling of sensory data that is consistent with the
thermodynamic equilibrium
will increase or decrease over
 current representation. This can be seen with a second rearrangement of the free energy as a mixture of accuracy and
a given amount of time. It complexity. Crucially, action can only affect accuracy (encoded by the ‘external states’ in the figure). This means that
states that the probability of the brain will reconfigure its sensory epithelia to sample inputs that are predicted by the recognition density — in other
the entropy decreasing words, to minimize prediction error.
becomes exponentially smaller
with time.

Attractor In short, the long-term (distal) imperative — of main- crucially, free energy can be evaluated because it is a
A set to which a dynamical taining states within physiological bounds — translates function of two things to which the agent has access: its
system evolves after a long into a short-term (proximal) avoidance of surprise. sensory states and a recognition density that is encoded
enough time. Points that
 surprise here relates not just to the current state, which by its internal states (for example, neuronal activity
get close to the attractor
remain close, even under cannot be changed, but also to movement from one state and connection strengths). The recognition density is a
small perturbations. to another, which can change. This motion can be com- probabilistic representation of what caused a particular
 plicated and itinerant (wandering) provided that it revis- sensation.
Kullback-Leibler divergence its a small set of states, called a global random attractor10, This (variational) free-energy construct was
(Or information divergence,
information gain or cross
 that are compatible with survival (for example, driving a introduced into statistical physics to convert difficult
entropy.) A non-commutative car within a small margin of error). It is this motion that probability-density integration problems into eas-
measure of the non-negative the free-energy principle optimizes. ier optimization problems 11. It is an information
difference between two so far, all we have said is that biological agents must theoretic quantity (like surprise), as opposed to a
probability distributions.
 avoid surprises to ensure that their states remain within thermodynamic quantity. variational free energy has
Recognition density physiological bounds (see supplementary information s1 been exploited in machine learning and statistics to
(Or ‘approximating conditional (box) for a more formal argument). But how do they solve many inference and learning problems12–14. In this
density’.) An approximate do this? A system cannot know whether its sensations setting, surprise is called the (negative) model evidence.
probability distribution of the are surprising and could not avoid them even if it did This means that minimizing surprise is the same as
causes of data (for example,
sensory input). It is the product
 know. This is where free energy comes in: free energy is maximizing the sensory evidence for an agent’s exist-
of inference or inverting a an upper bound on surprise, which means that if agents ence, if we regard the agent as a model of its world. In
generative model. minimize free energy, they implicitly minimize surprise. the present context, free energy provides the answer to


2 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
 REVIEWS

 a fundamental question: how do self-organizing adap- In summary, the free energy rests on a model of how
 tive systems avoid surprising states? They can do this by sensory data are generated and on a recognition density
 minimizing their free energy. so what does this involve? on the model’s parameters (that is, sensory causes). Free
 energy can be reduced only by changing the recognition
 Implications: action and perception. Agents can density to change conditional expectations about what is
 suppress free energy by changing the two things it depends sampled or by changing sensory samples (that is, sensory
Generative model on: they can change sensory input by acting on the world input) so that they conform to expectations. In what fol-
A probabilistic model (joint or they can change their recognition density by chang- lows, I consider these implications in light of some key
density) of the dependencies
 ing their internal states. This distinction maps nicely theories about the brain.
between causes and
consequences (data), from onto action and perception (BOX 1). one can see what this
which samples can be means in more detail by considering three mathematically The Bayesian brain hypothesis
generated. It is usually equivalent formulations of free energy (see supplementary The Bayesian brain hypothesis17 uses Bayesian probability
specified in terms of the information s2 (box) for a mathematical treatment). theory to formulate perception as a constructive process
likelihood of data, given their
causes (parameters of a model)
 The first formulation expresses free energy as energy based on internal or generative models. The underlying
and priors on the causes. minus entropy. This formulation is important for three idea is that the brain has a model of the world18–22 that
 reasons. First, it connects the concept of free energy as it tries to optimize using sensory inputs23–28. This idea is
Conditional density used in information theory with concepts used in sta- related to analysis by synthesis20 and epistemological autom-
(Or posterior density.) The
 tistical thermodynamics. second, it shows that the free ata19. In this view, the brain is an inference machine that
probability distribution of
causes or model parameters, energy can be evaluated by an agent because the energy actively predicts and explains its sensations18,22,25. central
given some data; that is, a is the surprise about the joint occurrence of sensations to this hypothesis is a probabilistic model that can gener-
probabilistic mapping from and their perceived causes, whereas the entropy is sim- ate predictions, against which sensory samples are tested
observed data to causes. ply that of the agent’s own recognition density. Third, it to update beliefs about their causes. This generative
Prior
 shows that free energy rests on a generative model of the model is decomposed into a likelihood (the probability of
The probability distribution or world, which is expressed in terms of the probability of a sensory data, given their causes) and a prior (the a priori
density of the causes of data sensation and its causes occurring together. This means probability of those causes). perception then becomes the
that encodes beliefs about that an agent must have an implicit generative model of process of inverting the likelihood model (mapping from
those causes before observing
 how causes conspire to produce sensory data. It is this causes to sensations) to access the posterior probability of
the data.
 model that defines both the nature of the agent and the the causes, given sensory data (mapping from sensations
Bayesian surprise quality of the free-energy bound on surprise. to causes). This inversion is the same as minimizing the
A measure of salience based The second formulation expresses free energy as difference between the recognition and posterior densi-
on the Kullback-Leibler surprise plus a divergence term. The (perceptual) diver- ties to suppress free energy. Indeed, the free-energy for-
divergence between the
recognition density (which
 gence is just the difference between the recognition den- mulation was developed to finesse the difficult problem
encodes posterior beliefs) and sity and the conditional density (or posterior density) of the of exact inference by converting it into an easier optimi-
the prior density. It causes of a sensation, given the sensory signals. This con- zation problem11–14. This has furnished some powerful
measures the information that ditional density represents the best possible guess about approximation techniques for model identification and
can be recognized in the data.
 the true causes. The difference between the two densities comparison (for example, variational Bayes or ensemble
Bayesian brain hypothesis is always non-negative and free energy is therefore an learning 29). There are many interesting issues that attend
The idea that the brain uses upper bound on surprise. Thus, minimizing free energy the Bayesian brain hypothesis, which can be illuminated
internal probabilistic by changing the recognition density (without changing by the free-energy principle; we will focus on two.
(generative) models to update sensory data) reduces the perceptual divergence, so that The first is the form of the generative model and
posterior beliefs, using sensory
information, in an
 the recognition density becomes the conditional density how it manifests in the brain. one criticism of Bayesian
(approximately) Bayes-optimal and the free energy becomes surprise. treatments is that they ignore the question of how prior
fashion. The third formulation expresses free energy as com- beliefs, which are necessary for inference, are formed27.
 plexity minus accuracy, using terms from the model However, this criticism dissolves with hierarchical
Analysis by synthesis
 comparison literature. complexity is the difference generative models, in which the priors themselves are
Any strategy (in speech coding)
in which the parameters of a between the recognition density and the prior density optimized26,28. In hierarchical models, causes in one
signal coder are evaluated by on causes; it is also known as Bayesian surprise15 and is the level generate subordinate causes in a lower level; sen-
decoding (synthesizing) the difference between the prior density — which encodes sory data per se are generated at the lowest level (BOX 2).
signal and comparing it with beliefs about the state of the world before sensory data are Minimizing the free energy effectively optimizes empiri-
the original input signal.
 assimilated — and posterior beliefs, which are encoded cal priors (that is, the probability of causes at one level,
Epistemological automata by the recognition density. Accuracy is simply the sur- given those in the level above). crucially, because empir-
Possibly the first theory for why prise about sensations that are expected under the recog- ical priors are linked hierarchically, they are informed
top-down influences (mediated nition density. This formulation shows that minimizing by sensory data, enabling the brain to optimize its prior
by backward connections in
 free energy by changing sensory data (without changing expectations online. This optimization makes every level
the brain) might be important
in perception and cognition. the recognition density) must increase the accuracy of in the hierarchy accountable to the others, furnishing an
 an agent’s predictions. In short, the agent will selectively internally consistent representation of sensory causes at
Empirical prior sample the sensory inputs that it expects. This is known multiple levels of description. Not only do hierarchical
A prior induced by hierarchical as active inference16. An intuitive example of this process models have a key role in statistics (for example, ran-
models; empirical priors
provide constraints on the
 (when it is raised into consciousness) would be feeling dom effects and parametric empirical Bayes models30,31),
recognition density in the usual our way in darkness: we anticipate what we might touch they may also be used by the brain, given the hierarchical
way but depend on the data. next and then try to confirm those expectations. arrangement of cortical sensory areas32–34.


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 3

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS

Box 2 | Hierarchical message passing in the brain The second issue is the form of the recognition den-
 sity that is encoded by physical attributes of the brain,
 ξv(i) = Πv(i) εv(i) = Πv(i) (μ(iv – 1) – g(μ (i) )) such as synaptic activity, efficacy and gain. In general,
 any density is encoded by its sufficient statistics (for exam-
 ξx(i) = Πx(i) εx(i) = Πx(i) (Dμ(ix ) – f(μ (i) ))
 ple, the mean and variance of a Gaussian form). The way
 the brain encodes these statistics places important con-
 Sensory ξv(3) straints on the sorts of schemes that underlie recognition:
 ξv(1)
 input ξv(2) ξx(2) they range from free-form schemes (for example, particle
 Backward:
 ξx(1) predictions filtering 26 and probabilistic population codes 35–38),
 Forward:
 prediction which use a vast number of sufficient statistics, to sim-
 error pler forms, which make stronger assumptions about
 μv(2) the shape of the recognition density, so that it can be
 s~(t)
 μv(1)
 μx(2) encoded with a small number of sufficient statistics. The
 μx(1) simplest assumed form is Gaussian, which requires only
 the conditional mean or expectation — this is known
 Lower cortical areas Higher cortical areas as the Laplace assumption39, under which the free energy
 Synaptic plasticity μ̇v(i) = Dμv(i) − (∂vε(i) )Tξ (i) − ξv(i + 1) Synaptic gain is just the difference between the model’s predictions
 �μθ ij = −∂θ ijεTξ μ̇x(i) = Dμx(i) − (∂xε(i) )Tξ (i) �μγi = ½tr(∂γi Π(ξξT − Π(μγ))) and the sensations or representations that are predicted.
 Minimizing free energy then corresponds to explaining
The figure details a neuronal architecture that optimizes the conditional expectations of away prediction errors. This is known as predictive coding
causes in hierarchical models of sensory input. It shows the putative cells of origin of forward and has become a popular framework for understand-
 Naturea lower
 Reviews Neuroscience
 | (for
driving connections that convey prediction error (grey arrows) from area ing neuronal message passing among different levels of
example, the lateral geniculate nucleus) to a higher area (for example, V1), and nonlinear cortical hierarchies40. In this scheme, prediction error
backward connections (black arrows) that construct predictions41. These predictions try to units compare conditional expectations with top-down
explain away prediction error in lower levels. In this scheme, the sources of forward and
 predictions to elaborate a prediction error. This predic-
backward connections are superficial and deep pyramidal cells (upper and lower triangles),
respectively, where state units are black and error units are grey. The equations represent a
 tion error is passed forward to drive the units in the
gradient descent on free energy using the generative model below. The two upper equations level above that encode conditional expectations which
describe the formation of prediction error encoded by error units, and the two lower optimize top-down predictions to explain away (reduce)
equations represent recognition dynamics, using a gradient descent on free energy. prediction error in the level below. Here, explaining
Generative models in the brain away just means countering excitatory bottom-up
To evaluate free energy one needs a generative model of how the sensorium is caused. inputs to a prediction error neuron with inhibitory syn-
Such models p(s̃,ϑ) = p(s̃ | ϑ) p(ϑ) combine the likelihood p(s̃ | ϑ) of getting some data given aptic inputs that are driven by top-down predictions
their causes and the prior beliefs about these causes, p(ϑ). The brain has to explain (see BOX 2 and REFS 41,42 for detailed discussion). The
complicated dynamics on continuous states with hierarchical or deep causal structure reciprocal exchange of bottom-up prediction errors and
and may use models with the following form top-down predictions proceeds until prediction error
 is minimized at all levels and conditional expectations
 U I Z  X   θ   \  X Ks  I Z K X K  θ K  \ K are optimized. This scheme has been invoked to explain
 … …
 Z· 
  H Z  X   θ   Y  Z· K  H Z K X K  θ K  Y K many features of early visual responses40,43 and provides
 a plausible account of repetition suppression and mis-
 Here, g(i) and f(i) are continuous nonlinear functions of (hidden and causal) states, with
 Nature Reviews
parameters θ(i). The random fluctuations Neuroscience
 | w(t)(i)
 z(t)(i) and play the part of observation match responses in electrophysiology 44. FIGURE 1 pro-
noise at the sensory level and state noise at higher levels. Causal states v(t)(i) link vides an example of perceptual categorization that uses
hierarchical levels, where the output of one level provides input to the next. Hidden this scheme.
states x(t)(i) link dynamics over time and endow the model with memory. Message passing of this sort is consistent with func-
Gaussian assumptions about the random fluctuations specify the likelihood tional asymmetries in real cortical hierarchies45, where
and Gaussian assumptions about state noise furnish empirical priors in terms of forward connections (which convey prediction errors)
predicted motion. These assumptions are encoded by their precision (or inverse are driving and backwards connections (which model
variance), П(i)(γ), which are functions of precision parameters γ. the nonlinear generation of sensory input) have both
recognition dynamics and prediction error driving and modulatory characteristics46. This asym-
If we assume that neuronal activity encodes the conditional expectation of states, then metrical message passing is also a characteristic feature
recognition can be formulated as a gradient descent on free energy. Under Gaussian of adaptive resonance theory 47,48, which has formal simi-
assumptions, these recognition dynamics can be expressed compactly in terms larities to predictive coding.
of precision-weighted prediction errors ξ(i) = П(i)(ε)(i) on the causal states and motion of
 In summary, the theme underlying the Bayesian brain
hidden states. The ensuing equations (see the figure) suggest two neuronal populations
that exchange messages: causal or hidden-state units encoding expected states and and predictive coding is that the brain is an inference
error units encoding prediction error. Under hierarchical models, error units receive engine that is trying to optimize probabilistic representa-
messages from the state units in the same level and the level above, whereas state units tions of what caused its sensory input. This optimization
are driven by error units in the same level and the level below. These provide bottom-up can be finessed using a (variational free-energy) bound
messages that drive conditional expectations μ(i) towards better predictions, which on surprise. In short, the free-energy principle entails
explain away prediction error. These top-down predictions correspond to g(μ(i)) and f(μ(i)). the Bayesian brain hypothesis and can be implemented
This scheme suggests that the only connections that link levels are forward connections by the many schemes considered in this field. Almost
conveying prediction error to state units and reciprocal backward connections that invariably, these involve some form of message passing
mediate predictions. See REFS 42,130 for details. Figure is modified from REF. 42. or belief propagation among brain areas or units. This


4 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
 REVIEWS

 a Perceptual inference allows us to connect the free-energy principle to another
 Vocal centre Syrinx Sonogram principled approach to sensory processing, namely
 information theory.

 The principle of efficient coding
 The principle of efficient coding suggests that the brain
 optimizes the mutual information (that is, the mutual
 predictability) between the sensorium and its internal
 v=
 v1 representation, under constraints on the efficiency of
 v2 those representations. This line of thinking was articu-
 lated by Barlow 49 in terms of a redundancy reduction
 principle (or principle of efficient coding) and formal-
 ized later in terms of the infomax principle50. It has been
 18x2 − 18x1 applied in machine learning 51, leading to methods
 ẋ = f(x, v) = v1 x1 − 2x3 x1 − x2 like independent component analysis52, and in neuro-
 2 x1 x2 − v2 x3 biology, contributing to an understanding of the nature
 of neuronal responses53–56. This principle is extremely
 b Perceptual categorization effective in predicting the empirical characteristics of
 Song a Song b Song c classical receptive fields53 and provides a principled
 5,000
 explanation for sparse coding 55 and the segregation of
 processing streams in visual hierarchies57. It has been


Frequency (Hz)
 4,000
 extended to cover dynamics and motion trajectories58,59
 and even used to infer the metabolic constraints on neu-
 3,000 ronal processing 60.
 At its simplest, the infomax principle says that
 2,000
 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
 neuronal activity should encode sensory information in
 Time (s) an efficient and parsimonious fashion. It considers the
 mapping between one set of variables (sensory states)
 c 50 3.5 and another (variables representing those states). At
 c
 40 µv1 first glance, this seems to preclude a probabilistic repre-
 3
 a b
 sentation, because this would involve mapping between
 30


 Estimated causes
 b sensory states and a probability density. However, the
 2.5 a
 20 infomax principle can be applied to the sufficient sta-
 c v2
 10 tistics of a recognition density. In this context, the info-
 2
 max principle becomes a special case of the free-energy
 0
 µ v1 principle, which arises when we ignore uncertainty
 1.5
 –10 in probabilistic representations (and when there is no
 action); see supplementary information s3 (box) for
 –20 1
 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 10 15 20 25 30 35 mathematical details). This is easy to see by noting that
 Time (s) v1 sensory signals are generated by causes. This means that it
Figure 1 | Birdsongs and perceptual categorization. a | The generative model of is sufficient to represent the causes to predict these
birdsong used in this simulation comprises a Lorenz attractor with two control parameters signals. More formally, the infomax principle can be
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
(or causal states) (v1,v2), which, in turn, delivers two control parameters (not shown) to a understood in terms of the decomposition of free energy
synthetic syrinx to produce ‘chirps’ that were modulated in amplitude and frequency (an into complexity and accuracy: mutual information is
example is shown as a sonogram). The chirps were then presented as a stimulus to a
 optimized when conditional expectations maximize
synthetic bird to see whether it could infer the underlying causal states and thereby
categorize the song. This entails minimizing free energy by changing the internal accuracy (or minimize prediction error), and efficiency
representation (μv1,μv2) of the control parameters. Examples of this perceptual inference or is assured by minimizing complexity. This ensures that
categorization are shown below. b | Three simulated songs are shown in sonogram format. no excessive parameters are applied in the generative
Each comprises a series of chirps, the frequency and number of which fall progressively model and leads to a parsimonious representation of
from song a to song c, as a causal state (known as the Raleigh number; v1 in part a) is sensory data that conforms to prior constraints on their
decreased. c | The graph on the left depicts the conditional expectations (μv1,μv2) of the causes. Interestingly, advanced model-optimization
causal states, shown as a function of peristimulus time for the three songs. It shows that techniques use free-energy optimization to eliminate
the causes are identified after around 600 ms with high conditional precision (90% redundant model parameters61, suggesting that free-
confidence intervals are shown in grey). The graph on the right shows the conditional energy optimization might provide a nice explanation
density on the causes shortly before the end of the peristimulus time (that is, the dotted
 for the synaptic pruning and homeostasis that take place
line in the left panel). The blue dots correspond to conditional expectations and the grey
areas correspond to the 90% conditional confidence regions. Note that these encompass in the brain during neurodevelopment 62 and sleep63.
the true values (red dots) of (v1,v2) that were used to generate the songs. These results The infomax principle pertains to a forward mapping
illustrate the nature of perceptual categorization under the inference scheme in BOX 2: from sensory input to representations. How does this
here, recognition corresponds to mapping from a continuously changing and chaotic square with optimizing generative models, which map
sensory input to a fixed point in perceptual space. Figure is reproduced, with permission, from causes to sensory inputs? These perspectives can be
from REF. 130 © (2009) Elsevier. reconciled by noting that all recognition schemes based


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 5

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS

 on infomax can be cast as optimizing the parameters of a by synaptic efficacy (these are μθ in BOX 2) have to be
 generative model64. For example, in sparse coding mod- optimized. This corresponds to optimizing connection
 els55, the implicit priors posit independent causes that strengths in the brain — that is, plasticity that under-
 are sampled from a heavy-tailed or sparse distribution42. lines learning. so what form would this learning take? It
 The fact that these models predict empirically observed transpires that a gradient descent on free energy (that is,
 receptive fields so well suggests that we are endowed changing connections to reduce free energy) is formally
 with (or acquire) prior expectations that the causes of identical to Hebbian plasticity 28,42 (BOX 2). This is because
 our sensations are largely independent and sparse. the parameters of the generative model determine how
 In summary, the principle of efficient coding says expected states (synaptic activity) are mixed to form pre-
 that the brain should optimize the mutual information dictions. put simply, when the presynaptic predictions
 between its sensory signals and some parsimonious and postsynaptic prediction errors are highly correlated,
 neuronal representations. This is the same as optimizing the connection strength increases, so that predictions
 the parameters of a generative model to maximize the can suppress prediction errors more efficiently.
 accuracy of predictions, under complexity constraints. In short, the formation of cell assemblies reflects the
 Both are mandated by the free-energy principle, which encoding of causal regularities. This is just a restate-
 can be regarded as a probabilistic generalization of the ment of cell assembly theory in the context of a specific
 infomax principle. We now turn to more biologically implementation (predictive coding) of the free-energy
Sufficient statistics
 inspired ideas about brain function that focus on neu- principle. It should be acknowledged that the learning
Quantities that are sufficient to
parameterize a probability ronal dynamics and plasticity. This takes us deeper into rule in predictive coding is really a delta rule, which
density (for example, mean and neurobiological mechanisms and the implementation of rests on Hebbian mechanisms; however, Hebb’s wider
covariance of a Gaussian the theoretical principles outlined above. notions of cell assemblies were formulated from a non-
density). statistical perspective. Modern reformulations suggest
Laplace assumption
 The cell assembly and correlation theory that both inference on states (that is, perception) and
(Or Laplace approximation or The cell assembly theory was proposed by Hebb65 and inference on parameters (that is, learning) minimize
method.) A saddle-point entails Hebbian — or associative — plasticity, which is a free energy (that is, minimize prediction error) and
approximation of the integral cornerstone of use-dependent or experience-dependent serve to bound surprising exchanges with the world. so
of an exponential function, that
 plasticity 66, the correlation theory of von de Malsburg 67,68 what about synchronization and the selective enabling
uses a second-order Taylor
expansion. When the function and other formal refinements to Hebbian plasticity of synapses?
is a probability density, the per se69. The cell assembly theory posits that groups of
implicit assumption is that interconnected neurons are formed through a strength- Biased competition and attention
the density is approximately ening of synaptic connections that depends on corre- causal regularities encoded by synaptic efficacy
Gaussian.
 lated pre- and postsynaptic activity; that is, ‘cells that fire control the deterministic evolution of states in the world.
Predictive coding together wire together’. This enables the brain to distil However, stochastic (that is, random) fluctuations in
A tool used in signal processing statistical regularities from the sensorium. The correla- these states play an important part in generating sen-
for representing a signal using tion theory considers the selective enabling of synaptic sory data. Their amplitude is usually represented as pre-
a linear predictive (generative)
 efficacy and its plasticity (also known as metaplastic- cision (or inverse variance), which encodes the reliability
model. It is a powerful speech
analysis technique and was ity 70) by fast synchronous activity induced by different of prediction errors. precision is important, especially
first considered in vision to perceptual attributes of the same object (for example, a in hierarchical schemes, because it controls the relative
explain lateral interactions in red bus in motion). This resolves a putative deficiency influence of bottom-up prediction errors and top-down
the retina. of classical plasticity, which cannot ascribe a presynaptic predictions. so how is precision encoded in the brain?
Infomax
 input to a particular cause (for example, redness) in the In predictive coding, precision modulates the amplitude
An optimization principle for world67. The correlation theory underpins theoretical of prediction errors (these are μγ in BOX 2), so that pre-
neural networks (or functions) treatments of synchronized brain activity and its role in diction errors with high precision have a greater impact
that map inputs to outputs. It associating or binding attributes to specific objects or on units that encode conditional expectations. This
says that the mapping should
 causes68,71. Another important field that rests on associa- means that precision corresponds to the synaptic gain of
maximize the Shannon mutual
information between the inputs tive plasticity is the use of attractor networks as models prediction error units. The most obvious candidates for
and outputs, subject to of memory formation and retrieval72–74. so how do corre- controlling gain (and implicitly encoding precision) are
constraints and/or noise lations and associative plasticity figure in the free-energy classical neuromodulators like dopamine and acetylcho-
processes. formulation? line, which provides a nice link to theories of attention
Stochastic
 Hitherto, we have considered only inference on states and uncertainty 75–77. Another candidate is fast synchro-
Governed by random effects. of the world that cause sensory signals, whereby condi- nized presynaptic input that lowers effective postsynaptic
 tional expectations about states are encoded by synaptic membrane time constants and increases synchronous
Biased competition activity. However, the causes covered by the recognition gain78. This fits comfortably with the correlation theory
An attentional effect mediated
 density are not restricted to time-varying states (for and speaks to recent ideas about the role of synchronous
by competitive interactions
among neurons representing example, the motion of an object in the visual field): activity in mediating attentional gain79,80.
visual stimuli; these they also include time-invariant regularities that endow In summary, the optimization of expected precision
interactions can be biased in the world with causal structure (for example, objects in terms of synaptic gain links attention to synaptic gain
favour of behaviourally relevant fall with constant acceleration). These regularities are and synchronization. This link is central to theories of
stimuli by both spatial and
non-spatial and both
 parameters of the generative model and have to be attentional gain and biased competition80–85, particularly
bottom-up and top-down inferred by the brain — in other words, the conditional in the context of neuromodulation86,87. The theories
processes. expectations of these parameters that may be encoded considered so far have dealt only with perception.


6 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
 REVIEWS

 However, from the point of view of the free-energy value or surprise is determined by the form of an agent’s
 principle, perception just makes free energy a good generative model and its implicit priors — these specify
 proxy for surprise. To actually reduce surprise we need the value of sensory states and, crucially, are heritable
 to act. In the next section, we retain a focus on cell through genetic and epigenetic mechanisms. This means
 assemblies but move to the selection and reinforcement that prior expectations (that is, the primary repertoire)
 of stimulus–response links. can prescribe a small number of attractive states with
 innate value. In turn, this enables natural selection to
 Neural Darwinism and value learning optimize prior expectations and ensure they are con-
 In the theory of neuronal group selection88, the emergence sistent with the agent’s phenotype. put simply, valuable
 of neuronal assemblies is considered in the light of selec- states are just the states that the agent expects to fre-
 tive pressure. The theory has four elements: epigenetic quent. These expectations are constrained by the form of
 mechanisms create a primary repertoire of neuronal its generative model, which is specified genetically and
 connections, which are refined by experience-dependent fulfilled behaviourally, under active inference.
 plasticity to produce a secondary repertoire of neuro- It is important to appreciate that prior expectations
 nal groups. These are selected and maintained through include not just what will be sampled from the world but
 reentrant signalling among neuronal groups. As in cell also how the world is sampled. This means that natural
 assembly theory, plasticity rests on correlated pre- and selection may equip agents with the prior expectation
 postsynaptic activity, but here it is modulated by value. that they will explore their environment until states
 value is signalled by ascending neuromodulatory trans- with innate value are encountered. We will look at this
 mitter systems and controls which neuronal groups more closely in the next section, where priors on motion
 are selected and which are not. The beauty of neural through state space are cast in terms of policies in
 Darwinism is that it nests distinct selective processes reinforcement learning.
 within each other. In other words, it eschews a single unit Both neural Darwinism and the free-energy principle
 of selection and exploits the notion of meta-selection try to understand somatic changes in an individual in
 (the selection of selective mechanisms; for example, see the context of evolution: neural Darwinism appeals to
 REF. 89). In this context, (neuronal) value confers evolu- selective processes, whereas the free energy formulation
 tionary value (that is, adaptive fitness) by selecting neu- considers the optimization of ensemble or population
 ronal groups that meditate adaptive stimulus–stimulus dynamics in terms of entropy and surprise. The key
 associations and stimulus–response links. The capacity theme that emerges here is that (heritable) prior expecta-
 of value to do this is assured by natural selection, in the tions can label things as innately valuable (unsurprising);
 sense that neuronal value systems are themselves subject but how can simply labelling states engender adaptive
 to selective pressure. behaviour? In the next section, we return to reinforce-
 This theory, particularly value-dependent learning90, ment learning and related formulations of action that try
 has deep connections with reinforcement learning and to explain adaptive behaviour purely in terms of labels
 related approaches in engineering (see below), such as or cost functions.
Reentrant signalling
 dynamic programming and temporal difference mod-
Reciprocal message passing
among neuronal groups. els91,92. This is because neuronal value systems reinforce Optimal control theory and game theory
 connections to themselves, thereby enabling the brain value is central to theories of brain function that are
Reinforcement learning to label a sensory state as valuable if, and only if, it leads to based on reinforcement learning and optimum con-
An area of machine learning another valuable state. This ensures that agents move trol. The basic notion that underpins these treatments
concerned with how an agent
maximizes long-term reward.
 through a succession of states that have acquired value to is that the brain optimizes value, which is expected
Reinforcement learning access states (rewards) with genetically specified innate reward or utility (or its complement — expected loss
algorithms attempt to find a value. In short, the brain maximizes value, which may be or cost). This is seen in behavioural psychology as rein-
policy that maps states of the reflected in the discharge of value systems (for example, forcement learning 98, in computational neuroscience
world to actions performed by
 dopaminergic systems92–96). so how does this relate to and machine learning as variants of dynamic program-
the agent.
 the optimization of free energy? ming such as temporal difference learning 99–101, and in
Optimal control theory The answer is simple: value is inversely proportional economics as expected utility theory 102. The notion of
An optimization method to surprise, in the sense that the probability of a pheno- an expected reward or cost is crucial here; this is the
(based on the calculus of type being in a particular state increases with the value cost expected over future states, given a particular policy
variations) for deriving an
optimal control law in a
 of that state. Furthermore, the evolutionary value of that prescribes action or choices. A policy specifies the
dynamical system. A control a phenotype is the negative surprise averaged over all states to which an agent will move from any given state
problem includes a cost the states it experiences, which is simply its negative (‘motion through state space in continuous time’). This
function that is a function of entropy. Indeed, the whole point of minimizing free policy has to access sparse rewarding states using a cost
state and control variables.
 energy (and implicitly entropy) is to ensure that agents function, which only labels states as costly or not. The
Bellman equation spend most of their time in a small number of valuable problem of how the policy is optimized is formalized
(Or dynamic programming states. This means that free energy is the complement of in optimal control theory as the Bellman equation and its
equation.) Named after value, and its long-term average is the complement of variants99 (see supplementary information s4 (box)),
Richard Bellman, it is a adaptive fitness (also known as free fitness in evolution- which express value as a function of the optimal policy
necessary condition for
optimality associated with
 ary biology 97). But how do agents know what is valu- and a cost function. If one can solve the Bellman equa-
dynamic programming in able? In other words, how does one generation tell the tion, one can associate each sensory state with a value
optimal control theory. next which states have value (that is, are unsurprising)? and optimize the policy by ensuring that the next state


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 7

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS

Optimal decision theory is the most valuable of the available states. In general, because it explains why agents must minimize expected
(Or game theory.) An area of it is impossible to solve the Bellman equation exactly, cost. Furthermore, free energy provides a quantitative
applied mathematics but several approximations exist, ranging from simple and seamless connection between the cost functions
concerned with identifying the Rescorla–Wagner models98 to more comprehensive for- of reinforcement learning and value in evolutionary
values, uncertainties and other
constraints that determine an
 mulations like Q-learning 100. cost also has a key role in biology. Finally, the dynamical perspective provides a
optimal decision. Bayesian decision theory, in which optimal decisions mechanistic insight into how policies are specified in the
 minimize expected cost in the context of uncertainty brain: according to the principle of optimality99 cost is the
Gradient ascent about outcomes; this is central to optimal decision theory rate of change of value (see supplementary information
(Or method of steepest
 (game theory) and behavioural economics102–104. s4 (box)), which depends on changes in sensory states.
ascent.) A first-order
optimization scheme that finds
 so what does free energy bring to the table? If one This suggests that optimal policies can be prescribed by
a maximum of a function by assumes that the optimal policy performs a gradient prior expectations about the motion of sensory states.
changing its arguments in ascent on value, then it is easy to show that value is put simply, priors induce a fixed-point attractor, and
proportion to the gradient of inversely proportional to surprise (see supplementary when the states arrive at the fixed point, value will stop
the function at the current
value. In short, a hill-climbing
 information s4 (box)). This means that free energy is changing and cost will be minimized. A simple exam-
scheme. The opposite scheme (an upper bound on) expected cost, which makes sense ple is shown in FIG. 2, in which a cued arm movement
is a gradient descent. as optimal control theory assumes that action mini- is simulated using only prior expectations that the arm
 mizes expected cost, whereas the free-energy principle will be drawn to a fixed point (the target). This figure
 states that it minimizes free energy. This is important illustrates how computational motor control105–109 can
 be formulated in terms of priors and the suppression of
 sensory prediction errors (K.J.F., J. Daunizeau, J. Kilner
 and s.J. Kiebel, unpublished observations). More gener-
 Predictions
 ξ(2)
 v Prediction errors ally, it shows how rewards and goals can be considered
 ξx(1) as prior expectations that an action is obliged to fulfil16
 μv(1) (see also REF. 110). It also suggests how natural selection
 ξv(1) μx(1) could optimize behaviour through the genetic specifi-
 cation of inheritable or innate priors that constrain the
 Movement learning of empirical priors (BOX 2) and subsequent goal-
 V trajectory directed action.
 svisual = + wvisual
 J It should be noted that just expecting to be attracted
 (0, 0)
 Motor to some states may not be sufficient to attain those states.
 signals x1 This is because one may have to approach attractors vicar-
 iously through other states (for example, to avoid obsta-
 x1 cles) or conform to physical constraints on action. These
 sprop = + wprop J1
 x2
 V = (v1, v2 , v3) are some of the more difficult problems of accessing
 ξv(1) distal rewards that reinforcement learning and opti-
 x2 J2
 Action
 mum control contend with. In these circumstances,
 a J = J1 + J2 = ( j1, j2 ) an examination of the density dynamics, on which the
 ȧ = −∂aεTξ Jointed arm free-energy principle is based, suggests that it is sufficient
Figure 2 | A demonstration of cued reaching movements. The lower right part of the to keep moving until an a priori attractor is encountered
figure shows a motor plant, comprising a two-jointed arm with two hidden states, each of (see supplementary information s5 (box)). This entails
which corresponds to a particular angular position of the two joints; the
 Nature current
 Reviews | position
 Neuroscience destroying unexpected (costly) fixed points in the envi-
of the finger (red circle) is the sum of the vectors describing the location of each joint. ronment by making them unstable (like shifting to a new
Here, causal states in the world are the position and brightness of the target (green position when sitting uncomfortably). Mathematically,
circle). The arm obeys Newtonian mechanics, specified in terms of angular inertia and this means adopting a policy that ensures a positive
friction. The left part of the figure illustrates that the brain senses hidden states directly divergence in costly states (intuitively, this is like being
in terms of proprioceptive input (Sprop) that signals the angular positions (x1,x2) of the
 pushed through a liquid with negative viscosity or
joints and indirectly through seeing the location of the finger in space (J1,J2). In addition,
through visual input (Svisual) the agent senses the target location (v1,v2) and brightness (v3). friction). see FIG. 3 for a solution to the classical
Sensory prediction errors are passed to higher brain levels to optimize the conditional mountain car problem using a simple prior that induces
expectations of hidden states (that is, the angular position of the joints) and causal (that this sort of policy. This prior is on motion through state
is, target) states. The ensuing predictions are sent back to suppress sensory prediction space (that is, changes in states) and enforces exploration
errors. At the same time, sensory prediction errors are also trying to suppress themselves until an attractive state is found. priors of this sort may
by changing sensory input through action. The grey and black lines denote reciprocal provide a principled way to understand the exploration–
message passing among neuronal populations that encode prediction error and exploitation trade-off111–113 and related issues in evolu-
conditional expectations; this architecture is the same as that depicted in BOX 2. The tionary biology 114. The implicit use of priors to induce
blue lines represent descending motor control signals from sensory prediction-error dynamical instability also provides a key connection
units. The agent’s generative model included priors on the motion of hidden states that
 to dynamical systems theory approaches to the brain
effectively engage an invisible elastic band between the finger and target (when the
target is illuminated). This induces a prior expectation that the finger will be drawn to that emphasize the importance of itinerant dynamics,
the target, when cued appropriately. The insert shows the ensuing movement trajectory metastability, self-organized criticality and winner-
caused by action. The red circles indicate the initial and final positions of the finger, less competition115–123. These dynamical phenomena
which reaches the target (green circle) quickly and smoothly; the blue line is the have a key role in synergetic and autopoietic accounts of
simulated trajectory. adaptive behaviour 5,124,125.


8 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
 REVIEWS

 a b
 The mountain car problem Loss functions (priors) Conditional expectations
 0.7 5 30

 0.6 0 25
 −c(t)
 0.5 –5 20


 Estimated states
 0.4 –10 15
 Height
 c(x)
 Force –15
 0.3 ϕ(x) 10

 0.2 –20 5
 μ(t)x
 0.1 –25 0

 0 –30 –5
 -2 -1 0 1 2 –2 –1 0 1 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 120
 Position (x) Position (x) Time (seconds)

Principle of optimality
An optimal policy has
 Equations of motion Trajectories Action
the property that whatever the
initial state and initial decision, 2 3
 ẋ x′
the remaining decisions must f= = x′
constitute an optimal policy ẋ′ −∇xϕ − 1⁄8 x′ + σ(a) 2
with regard to the state 1
 1 a(t)


 Control signal
resulting from the first decision.


 Velocity
 0 0
Exploration–exploitation
trade-off
 –1
Involves a balance between
 –1
exploration (of uncharted –2
territory) and exploitation (of
current knowledge). In –2 –3
reinforcement learning, it has –2 –1 0 1 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 120
been studied mainly through Position (x) Time (seconds)
the multi-armed bandit
problem. Figure 3 | solving the mountain car problem with prior expectations. a | How paradoxical but adaptive behaviour (for
 example, moving away from a target to ensure that it is secured later) emerges from simple priors Nature Reviews
 on the motion Neuroscience
 | of hidden
Dynamical systems theory states in the world. Shown is the landscape or potential energy function (with a minimum at position x = –0.5) that exerts
An area of applied forces on a mountain car. The car is shown at the target position on the hill at x =1, indicated by the red circle. The equations
mathematics that describes of motion of the car are shown below the plot. Crucially, at x = 0 the force on the car cannot be overcome by the agent,
the behaviour of complex
 because a squashing function –1≤σ≤1 is applied to action to prevent it being greater than 1. This means that the agent can
(possibly chaotic) dynamical
 access the target only by starting halfway up the left hill to gain enough momentum to carry it up the other side. b | The
systems as described by
differential or difference
 results of active inference under priors that destabilize fixed points outside the target domain. The priors are encoded in a
equations. cost function c(x) (top left), which acts like negative friction. When ‘friction’ is negative the car expects to go faster (see
 Supplementary information S5 (box) for details). The inferred hidden states (upper right: position in blue, velocity in green
Synergetics and negative dissipation in red) show that the car explores its landscape until it encounters the target, and that friction then
Concerns the self-organization increases (that is, cost decreases) dramatically to prevent the car from escaping the target (by falling down the hill). The
of patterns and structures in ensuing trajectory is shown in blue (bottom left). The paler lines provide exemplar trajectories from other trials, with
open systems far from different starting positions. In the real world, friction is constant. However, the car ‘expects’ friction to change as it changes
thermodynamic equilibrium. It
 position, thus enforcing exploration or exploitation. These expectations are fulfilled by action (lower right).
rests on the order parameter
concept, which was generalized
by Haken to the enslaving
principle: that is, the dynamics
of fast-relaxing (stable) modes In summary, optimal control and decision (game) Conclusions and future directions
are completely determined by theory start with the notion of cost or utility and try to Although contrived to highlight commonalities, this
the ‘slow’ dynamics of order construct value functions of states, which subsequently Review suggests that many global theories of brain
parameters (the amplitudes of guide action. The free-energy formulation starts with function can be united under a Helmholtzian percep-
unstable modes).
 a free-energy bound on the value of states, which is tive of the brain as a generative model of the world it
Autopoietic specified by priors on the motion of hidden environ- inhabits18,20,21,25 (FIG. 4); notable examples include the
Referring to the fundamental mental states. These priors can incorporate any cost integration of the Bayesian brain and computational
dialectic between structure function to ensure that costly states are avoided. states motor control theory, the objective functions shared
and function.
 with minimum cost can be set (by learning or evolu- by predictive coding and the infomax principle,
Helmholtzian tion) in terms of prior expectations about motion and hierarchical inference and theories of attention, the
Refers to a device or scheme the attractors that ensue. In this view, the problem of embedding of perception in natural selection and
that uses a generative model to finding sparse rewards in the environment is nature’s the link between optimum control and more exotic
furnish a recognition density solution to the problem of how to minimize the entropy phenomena in dynamical systems theory. The constant
and learns hidden structures in
data by optimizing the
 (average surprise or free energy) of an agent’s states: by theme in all these theories is that the brain optimizes
parameters of generative ensuring they occupy a small set of attracting (that is, a (free-energy) bound on surprise or its complement,
models. rewarding) states. value. This manifests as perception (so as to change


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 9

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS


 Attention and biased competition Computational motor control
 μγ = arg min ∫dtF ȧ = −∂aεTξ
 Optimization of synaptic gain Minimization of sensory
 representing the precision prediction errors
 (salience) of predictions
 Predictive coding and hierarchical inference
 μ̇v(i) = Dμv(i) − ∂vε (i) Tξ (i) − ξv (i + 1)
 Associative plasticity
 Minimization of prediction error
 �μθ ij = −∂θ ijεTξ Optimal control and value learning
 with recurrent message passing
 Optimization of synaptic efficacy a, μ = arg max V (s~ | m)
 The Bayesian brain hypothesis Optimization of a free-energy
 Perceptual learning and memory μ = arg min D (q(ϑ) || (p(ϑ | s~ ))
 KL
 bound on surprise or value

 μθ = arg min ∫dtF Minimizing the difference between a
 recognition density and the conditional
 Optimization of synaptic efficacy density on sensory causes
 to represent causal structure
 in the sensorium
 The free-energy principle
 Infomax and the redundancy
 a, μ, m = arg min F (s~, μ | m) minimization principle
 Probabilistic neuronal coding
 q(ϑ ) = N ( μ, Σ)
 Minimization of the free energy of μ = arg max {I (s~, μ ) − H(μ)}
 sensations and the representation
 Encoding a recognition density of their causes Maximization of the mutual
 in terms of conditional information between sensations
 expectations and uncertainty and representations
 Model selection and evolution
 m = arg min ∫dtF
 Optimizing the agent’s model and
 priors through neurodevelopment
 and natural selection


 Figure 4 | The free-energy principle and other theories. Some of the theoretical constructs considered in this Review
 and how they relate to the free-energy principle (centre). The variables are described in BOXESNature Reviews
 1,2 and | Neuroscience
 a full explanation
 of the equations can be found in the Supplementary information S1–S4 (boxes).


 predictions) or action (so as to change the sensations to old problems that might call for a reappraisal of
 that are predicted). crucially, these predictions depend conventional notions, particularly in reinforcement
 on prior expectations (that furnish policies), which learning and motor control.
 are optimized at different (somatic and evolutionary) If the arguments underlying the free-energy principle
 timescales and define what is valuable. hold, then the real challenge is to understand how it
 What does the free-energy principle portend for the manifests in the brain. This speaks to a greater appre-
 future? If its main contribution is to integrate estab- ciation of hierarchical message passing 41, the func-
 lished theories, then the answer is probably ‘not a lot’. tional role of specific neurons and microcircuits and
 conversely, it may provide a framework in which cur- the dynamics they support (for example, what is the
 rent debates could be resolved, for example whether relationship between predictive coding, attention
 dopamine encodes reward prediction error or sur- and dynamic coordination in the brain?129). Beyond
 prise126,127 — this is particularly important for under- neuroscience, many exciting applications in engineering,
 standing conditions like addiction, parkinson’s disease robotics, embodied cognition and evolutionary biology
 and schizophrenia. Indeed, the free-energy formulation suggest themselves; although fanciful, it is not difficult to
 has already been used to explain the positive symptoms imagine building little free-energy machines that garner
 of schizophrenia in terms of false inference128. The free- and model sensory information (like our children) to
 energy formulation could also provide new approaches maximize the evidence for their own existence.


1. Huang, G. Is this a unified theory of the brain? paper focuses on perception and the Physics, Chemistry and Biology 3rd edn (Springer,
 New Scientist 2658, 30–33 (2008). neurobiological infrastructures involved. New York, 1983).
2. Friston K., Kilner, J. & Harrison, L. A free energy 3. Ashby, W. R. Principles of the self-organising dynamic 6. Kauffman, S. The Origins of Order: Self‑Organization
 principle for the brain. J. Physiol. Paris 100, 70–87 system. J. Gen. Psychol. 37, 125–128 (1947). and Selection in Evolution (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford,
 (2006). 4. Nicolis, G. & Prigogine, I. Self‑Organisation in Non‑ 1993).
 An overview of the free-energy principle that Equilibrium Systems (Wiley, New York, 1977). 7. Bernard, C. Lectures on the Phenomena Common
 describes its motivation and relationship to 5. Haken, H. Synergistics: an Introduction. Non‑ to Animals and Plants (Thomas, Springfield,
 generative models and predictive coding. This Equilibrium Phase Transition and Self‑Organisation in 1974).


10 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
 REVIEWS

8. Applebaum, D. Probability and Information: an 36. Zemel, R., Dayan, P. & Pouget, A. Probabilistic 60. Laughlin, S. B. Efficiency and complexity in neural
 Integrated Approach (Cambridge Univ. Press, interpretation of population code. Neural Comput. 10, coding. Novartis Found. Symp. 239, 177–187
 Cambridge, UK, 2008). 403–430 (1998). (2001).
9. Evans, D. J. A non-equilibrium free energy theorem 37. Paulin, M. G. Evolution of the cerebellum as a 61. Tipping, M. E. Sparse Bayesian learning and the
 for deterministic systems. Mol. Physics 101, neuronal machine for Bayesian state estimation. Relevance Vector Machine. J. Machine Learn. Res. 1,
 15551–11554 (2003). J. Neural Eng. 2, S219–S234 (2005). 211–244 (2001).
10. Crauel, H. & Flandoli, F. Attractors for random 38. Ma, W. J., Beck, J. M., Latham, P. E. & Pouget, A. 62. Paus, T., Keshavan, M. & Giedd, J. N. Why do many
 dynamical systems. Probab. Theory Relat. Fields 100, Bayesian inference with probabilistic population psychiatric disorders emerge during adolescence?
 365–393 (1994). codes. Nature Neurosci. 9, 1432–1438 (2006). Nature Rev. Neurosci. 9, 947–957 (2008).
11. Feynman, R. P. Statistical Mechanics: a Set of Lectures 39. Friston, K., Mattout, J., Trujillo-Barreto, N., 63. Gilestro, G. F., Tononi, G. & Cirelli, C. Widespread
 (Benjamin, Reading, Massachusetts, 1972). Ashburner, J. & Penny, W. Variational free energy and changes in synaptic markers as a function of sleep and
12. Hinton, G. E. & von Cramp, D. Keeping neural the Laplace approximation. Neuroimage 34, wakefulness in Drosophila. Science 324, 109–112
 networks simple by minimising the description length 220–234 (2007). (2009).
 of weights. Proc. 6th Annu. ACM Conf. Computational 40. Rao, R. P. & Ballard, D. H. Predictive coding in the 64. Roweis, S. & Ghahramani, Z. A unifying review of
 Learning Theory 5–13 (1993). visual cortex: a functional interpretation of some linear Gaussian models. Neural Comput. 11, 305–345
13. MacKay. D. J. C. Free-energy minimisation algorithm extra-classical receptive field effects. Nature Neurosci. (1999).
 for decoding and cryptoanalysis. Electron. Lett. 31, 2, 79–87 (1998). 65. Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behaviour (Wiley,
 445–447 (1995). Applies predictive coding to cortical processing to New York, 1949).
14. Neal, R. M. & Hinton, G. E. in Learning in Graphical provide a compelling account of extra-classical 66. Paulsen, O. & Sejnowski, T. J. Natural patterns of
 Models (ed. Jordan, M. I.) 355–368 (Kluwer receptive fields in the visual system. It emphasizes activity and long-term synaptic plasticity. Curr. Opin.
 Academic, Dordrecht, 1998). the importance of top-down projections in Neurobiol. 10, 172–179 (2000).
15. Itti, L. & Baldi, P. Bayesian surprise attracts human providing predictions, by modelling perceptual 67. von der Malsburg, C. The Correlation Theory of Brain
 attention. Vision Res. 49, 1295–1306 (2009). inference. Function. Internal Report 81–82, Dept. Neurobiology,
16. Friston, K., Daunizeau, J. & Kiebel, S. Active inference 41. Mumford, D. On the computational architecture of the Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
 or reinforcement learning? PLoS ONE 4, e6421 neocortex. II. The role of cortico-cortical loops. Biol. (1981).
 (2009). Cybern. 66, 241–251 (1992). 68. Singer, W. & Gray, C. M. Visual feature integration and
17. Knill, D. C. & Pouget, A. The Bayesian brain: the role 42. Friston, K. Hierarchical models in the brain. PLoS the temporal correlation hypothesis. Annu. Rev.
 of uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Comput. Biol. 4, e1000211 (2008). Neurosci. 18, 555–586 (1995).
 Trends Neurosci. 27, 712–719 (2004). 43. Murray, S. O., Kersten, D., Olshausen, B. A., Schrater, P. 69. Bienenstock, E. L., Cooper, L. N. & Munro, P. W.
 A nice review of Bayesian theories of perception & Woods, D. L. Shape perception reduces activity in Theory for the development of neuron selectivity:
 and sensorimotor control. Its focus is on Bayes human primary visual cortex. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. orientation specificity and binocular interaction in
 optimality in the brain and the implicit nature of USA 99, 15164–15169 (2002). visual cortex. J. Neurosci. 2, 32–48 (1982).
 neuronal representations. 44. Garrido, M. I., Kilner, J. M., Kiebel, S. J. & Friston, 70. Abraham, W. C. & Bear, M. F. Metaplasticity: the
18. von Helmholtz, H. in Treatise on Physiological Optics K. J. Dynamic causal modeling of the response to plasticity of synaptic plasticity. Trends Neurosci. 19,
 Vol. III 3rd edn (Voss, Hamburg, 1909). frequency deviants. J. Neurophysiol. 101, 126–130 (1996).
19. MacKay, D. M. in Automata Studies (eds Shannon, 2620–2631 (2009). 71. Pareti, G. & De Palma, A. Does the brain oscillate?
 C. E. & McCarthy, J.) 235–251 (Princeton Univ. Press, 45. Sherman, S. M. & Guillery, R. W. On the actions that The dispute on neuronal synchronization. Neurol. Sci.
 Princeton, 1956). one nerve cell can have on another: distinguishing 25, 41–47 (2004).
20. Neisser, U. Cognitive Psychology “drivers” from “modulators”. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 72. Leutgeb, S., Leutgeb, J. K., Moser, M. B. & Moser, E. I.
 (Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1967). 95, 7121–7126 (1998). Place cells, spatial maps and the population code for
21. Gregory, R. L. Perceptual illusions and brain models. 46. Angelucci, A. & Bressloff, P. C. Contribution of memory. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 15, 738–746
 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 171, 179–196 (1968). feedforward, lateral and feedback connections to the (2005).
22. Gregory, R. L. Perceptions as hypotheses. Philos. classical receptive field center and extra-classical 73. Durstewitz, D. & Seamans, J. K. Beyond bistability:
 Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 290, 181–197 (1980). receptive field surround of primate V1 neurons. biophysics and temporal dynamics of working memory.
23. Ballard, D. H., Hinton, G. E. & Sejnowski, T. J. Parallel Prog. Brain Res. 154, 93–120 (2006). Neuroscience 139, 119–133 (2006).
 visual computation. Nature 306, 21–26 (1983). 47. Grossberg, S. Towards a unified theory of neocortex: 74. Anishchenko, A. & Treves, A. Autoassociative memory
24. Kawato, M., Hayakawa, H. & Inui, T. A forward-inverse laminar cortical circuits for vision and cognition. retrieval and spontaneous activity bumps in small-
 optics model of reciprocal connections between visual Prog. Brain Res. 165, 79–104 (2007). world networks of integrate-and-fire neurons.
 areas. Network: Computation in Neural Systems 4, 48. Grossberg, S. & Versace, M. Spikes, synchrony, and J. Physiol. Paris 100, 225–236 (2006).
 415–422 (1993). attentive learning by laminar thalamocortical circuits. 75. Abbott, L. F., Varela, J. A., Sen, K. & Nelson, S. B.
25. Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E. & Neal, R. M. The Helmholtz Brain Res. 1218, 278–312 (2008). Synaptic depression and cortical gain control. Science
 machine. Neural Comput. 7, 889–904 (1995). 49. Barlow, H. in Sensory Communication (ed. Rosenblith, W.) 275, 220–224 (1997).
 This paper introduces the central role of generative 217–234 (MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 76. Yu, A. J. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty, neuromodulation
 models and variational approaches to hierarchical 1961). and attention. Neuron 46, 681–692 (2005).
 self-supervised learning and relates this to the 50. Linsker, R. Perceptual neural organisation: some 77. Doya, K. Metalearning and neuromodulation. Neural
 function of bottom-up and top-down cortical approaches based on network models and Netw. 15, 495–506 (2002).
 processing pathways. information theory. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 13, 78. Chawla, D., Lumer, E. D. & Friston, K. J. The
26. Lee, T. S. & Mumford, D. Hierarchical Bayesian 257–281 (1990). relationship between synchronization among neuronal
 inference in the visual cortex. J. Opt. Soc. Am. A Opt. 51. Oja, E. Neural networks, principal components, and populations and their mean activity levels. Neural
 Image Sci. Vis. 20, 1434–1448 (2003). subspaces. Int. J. Neural Syst. 1, 61–68 (1989). Comput. 11, 1389–1411 (1999).
27. Kersten, D., Mamassian, P. & Yuille, A. Object 52. Bell, A. J. & Sejnowski, T. J. An information 79. Fries, P., Womelsdorf, T., Oostenveld, R. & Desimone, R.
 perception as Bayesian inference. Annu. Rev. Psychol. maximisation approach to blind separation and blind The effects of visual stimulation and selective visual
 55, 271–304 (2004). de-convolution. Neural Comput. 7, 1129–1159 attention on rhythmic neuronal synchronization in
28. Friston, K. J. A theory of cortical responses. Philos. (1995). macaque area V4. J. Neurosci. 28, 4823–4835
 Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360, 815–836 53. Atick, J. J. & Redlich, A. N. What does the retina know (2008).
 (2005). about natural scenes? Neural Comput. 4, 196–210 80. Womelsdorf, T. & Fries, P. Neuronal coherence during
29. Beal, M. J. Variational Algorithms for Approximate (1992). selective attentional processing and sensory-motor
 Bayesian Inference. Thesis, University College London 54. Optican, L. & Richmond, B. J. Temporal encoding of integration. J. Physiol. Paris 100, 182–193 (2006).
 (2003). two-dimensional patterns by single units in primate 81. Desimone, R. Neural mechanisms for visual memory
30. Efron, B. & Morris, C. Stein’s estimation rule and its inferior cortex. III Information theoretic analysis. and their role in attention. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
 competitors – an empirical Bayes approach. J. Am. J. Neurophysiol. 57, 132–146 (1987). 93, 13494–13499 (1996).
 Stats. Assoc. 68, 117–130 (1973). 55. Olshausen, B. A. & Field, D. J. Emergence of simple- A nice review of mnemonic effects (such as
31. Kass, R. E. & Steffey, D. Approximate Bayesian cell receptive field properties by learning a sparse repetition suppression) on neuronal responses and
 inference in conditionally independent hierarchical code for natural images. Nature 381, 607–609 how they bias the competitive interactions between
 models (parametric empirical Bayes models). J. Am. (1996). stimulus representations in the cortex. It provides
 Stat. Assoc. 407, 717–726 (1989). 56. Simoncelli, E. P. & Olshausen, B. A. Natural image a good perspective on attentional mechanisms in
32. Zeki, S. & Shipp, S. The functional logic of cortical statistics and neural representation. Annu. Rev. the visual system that is empirically grounded.
 connections. Nature 335, 311–317 (1988). Neurosci. 24, 1193–1216 (2001). 82. Treisman, A. Feature binding, attention and object
 Describes the functional architecture of cortical A nice review of information theory in visual perception. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.
 hierarchies with a focus on patterns of anatomical processing. It covers natural scene statistics and 353, 1295–1306 (1998).
 connections in the visual cortex. It emphasizes the empirical tests of the efficient coding hypothesis in 83. Maunsell, J. H. & Treue, S. Feature-based attention in
 role of functional segregation and integration (that individual neurons and populations of neurons. visual cortex. Trends Neurosci. 29, 317–322 (2006).
 is, message passing among cortical areas). 57. Friston, K. J. The labile brain. III. Transients and 84. Spratling, M. W. Predictive-coding as a model of
33. Felleman, D. J. & Van Essen, D. C. Distributed spatio-temporal receptive fields. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. biased competition in visual attention. Vision Res. 48,
 hierarchical processing in the primate cerebral cortex. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 355, 253–265 (2000). 1391–1408 (2008).
 Cereb. Cortex 1, 1–47 (1991). 58. Bialek, W., Nemenman, I. & Tishby, N. Predictability, 85. Reynolds, J. H. & Heeger, D. J. The normalization
34. Mesulam, M. M. From sensation to cognition. Brain complexity, and learning. Neural Comput. 13, model of attention. Neuron 61, 168–185 (2009).
 121, 1013–1052 (1998). 2409–2463 (2001). 86. Schroeder, C. E., Mehta, A. D. & Foxe, J. J.
35. Sanger, T. Probability density estimation for the 59. Lewen, G. D., Bialek, W. & de Ruyter van Steveninck, Determinants and mechanisms of attentional
 interpretation of neural population codes. R. R. Neural coding of naturalistic motion stimuli. modulation of neural processing. Front. Biosci. 6,
 J. Neurophysiol. 76, 2790–2793 (1996). Network 12, 317–329 (2001). D672–D684 (2001).


NATuRE REvIEWs | NeuroscieNce ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN | 11

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved
REVIEWS

87. Hirayama, J., Yoshimoto, J. & Ishii, S. Bayesian 106. Todorov, E. & Jordan, M. I. Smoothness maximization 119. Bressler, S. L. & Tognoli, E. Operational principles of
 representation learning in the cortex regulated by along a predefined path accurately predicts the speed neurocognitive networks. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 60,
 acetylcholine. Neural Netw. 17, 1391–1400 (2004). profiles of complex arm movements. J. Neurophysiol. 139–148 (2006).
88. Edelman, G. M. Neural Darwinism: selection and 80, 696–714 (1998). 120. Werner, G. Brain dynamics across levels of
 reentrant signaling in higher brain function. Neuron 107. Tseng, Y. W., Diedrichsen, J., Krakauer, J. W., organization. J. Physiol. Paris 101, 273–279 (2007).
 10, 115–125 (1993). Shadmehr, R. & Bastian, A. J. Sensory prediction- 121. Pasquale, V., Massobrio, P., Bologna, L. L.,
89. Knobloch, F. Altruism and the hypothesis of meta- errors drive cerebellum-dependent adaptation of Chiappalone, M. & Martinoia, S. Self-organization and
 selection in human evolution. J. Am. Acad. reaching. J. Neurophysiol. 98, 54–62 (2007). neuronal avalanches in networks of dissociated cortical
 Psychoanal. 29, 339–354 (2001). 108. Bays, P. M. & Wolpert, D. M. Computational neurons. Neuroscience 153, 1354–1369 (2008).
90. Friston, K. J., Tononi, G., Reeke, G. N. Jr, Sporns, O. & principles of sensorimotor control that minimize 122. Kitzbichler, M. G., Smith, M. L., Christensen, S. R. &
 Edelman, G. M. Value-dependent selection in the uncertainty and variability. J. Physiol. 578, 387–396 Bullmore, E. Broadband criticality of human brain
 brain: simulation in a synthetic neural model. (2007). network synchronization. PLoS Comput. Biol. 5,
 Neuroscience 59, 229–243 (1994). A nice overview of computational principles in e1000314 (2009).
91. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Toward a modern theory of motor control. Its focus is on representing 123. Rabinovich, M., Huerta, R. & Laurent, G. Transient
 adaptive networks: expectation and prediction. uncertainty and optimal estimation when dynamics for neural processing. Science 321 48–50
 Psychol. Rev. 88, 135–170 (1981). extracting the sensory information required for (2008).
92. Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., Person, C. & Sejnowski, motor planning. 124. Tschacher, W. & Hake, H. Intentionality in non-
 T. J. Bee foraging in uncertain environments using 109. Shadmehr, R. & Krakauer, J. W. A computational equilibrium systems? The functional aspects of self-
 predictive Hebbian learning. Nature 377, 725–728 neuroanatomy for motor control. Exp. Brain Res. 185, organised pattern formation. New Ideas Psychol. 25,
 (1995). 359–381 (2008). 1–15 (2007).
 A computational treatment of behaviour that 110. Verschure, P. F., Voegtlin, T. & Douglas, R. J. 125. Maturana, H. R. & Varela, F. De máquinas y seres
 combines ideas from optimal control theory and Environmentally mediated synergy between vivos (Editorial Universitaria, Santiago, 1972).
 dynamic programming with the neurobiology of perception and behaviour in mobile robots. Nature English translation available in Maturana, H. R. &
 reward. This provided an early example of value 425, 620–624 (2003). Varela, F. in Autopoiesis and Cognition (Reidel,
 learning in the brain. 111. Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M. & Yu, A. J. Should I stay Dordrecht, 1980).
93. Schultz, W. Predictive reward signal of dopamine or should I go? How the human brain manages the 126. Fiorillo, C. D., Tobler, P. N. & Schultz, W. Discrete
 neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 80, 1–27 (1998). trade-off between exploitation and exploration. Philos. coding of reward probability and uncertainty by
94. Daw, N. D. & Doya, K. The computational Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 362, 933–942 dopamine neurons. Science 299, 1898–1902
 neurobiology of learning and reward. Curr. Opin. (2007). (2003).
 Neurobiol. 16, 199–204 (2006). 112. Ishii, S., Yoshida, W. & Yoshimoto, J. Control of 127. Niv, Y., Duff, M. O. & Dayan, P. Dopamine,
95. Redgrave, P. & Gurney, K. The short-latency dopamine exploitation-exploration meta-parameter in uncertainty and TD learning. Behav. Brain Funct. 1, 6
 signal: a role in discovering novel actions? Nature Rev. reinforcement learning. Neural Netw. 15, 665–687 (2005).
 Neurosci. 7, 967–975 (2006). (2002). 128. Fletcher, P. C. & Frith, C. D. Perceiving is believing: a
96. Berridge, K. C. The debate over dopamine’s role in 113. Usher, M., Cohen, J. D., Servan-Schreiber, D., Bayesian approach to explaining the positive
 reward: the case for incentive salience. Rajkowski, J. & Aston-Jones, G. The role of locus symptoms of schizophrenia. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 10,
 Psychopharmacology (Berl.) 191, 391–431 (2007). coeruleus in the regulation of cognitive performance. 48–58 (2009).
97. Sella, G. & Hirsh, A. E. The application of statistical Science 283, 549–554 (1999). 129. Phillips, W. A. & Silverstein, S. M. Convergence of
 physics to evolutionary biology. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. 114. Voigt, C. A., Kauffman, S. & Wang, Z. G. Rational biological and psychological perspectives on cognitive
 USA 102, 9541–9546 (2005). evolutionary design: the theory of in vitro protein coordination in schizophrenia. Behav. Brain Sci. 26,
98. Rescorla, R. A. & Wagner, A. R. in Classical evolution. Adv. Protein Chem. 55, 79–160 (2000). 65–82 (2003).
 Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory (eds 115. Freeman, W. J. Characterization of state transitions in 130. Friston, K. & Kiebel, S. Cortical circuits for perceptual
 Black, A. H. & Prokasy, W. F.) 64–99 (Appleton spatially distributed, chaotic, nonlinear, dynamical inference. Neural Netw. 22, 1093–1104 (2009).
 Century Crofts, New York, 1972). systems in cerebral cortex. Integr. Physiol. Behav. Sci.
99. Bellman, R. On the Theory of Dynamic Programming. 29, 294–306 (1994). Acknowledgments
 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 38, 716–719 (1952). 116. Tsuda, I. Toward an interpretation of dynamic neural This work was funded by the Wellcome Trust. I would like to
100. Watkins, C. J. C. H. & Dayan, P. Q-learning. Mach. activity in terms of chaotic dynamical systems. Behav. thank my colleagues at the Wellcome Trust Centre for
 Learn. 8, 279–292 (1992). Brain Sci. 24, 793–810 (2001). Neuroimaging, the Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience and the
101. Todorov, E. in Advances in Neural Information 117. Jirsa, V. K., Friedrich, R., Haken, H. & Kelso, J. A. Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit for collaborations
 Processing Systems (eds Scholkopf, B., Platt, J. & A theoretical model of phase transitions in the human and discussions.
 Hofmann T.) 19, 1369–1376 (MIT Press, 2006). brain. Biol. Cybern. 71, 27–35 (1994).
102. Camerer, C. F. Behavioural studies of strategic thinking This paper develops a theoretical model (based on Competing interests statement
 in games. Trends Cogn. Sci. 7, 225–231 (2003). synergetics and nonlinear oscillator theory) that The author declares no competing financial interests.
103. Smith, J. M. & Price, G. R. The logic of animal conflict. reproduces observed dynamics and suggests a
 Nature 246, 15–18 (1973). formulation of biophysical coupling among brain
104. Nash, J. Equilibrium points in n-person games. systems. SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION
 Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 36, 48–49 (1950). 118. Breakspear, M. & Stam, C. J. Dynamics of a See online article: S1 (box) | S2 (box) | S3 (box) | S4 (box) |
105. Wolpert, D. M. & Miall, R. C. Forward models for neural system with a multiscale architecture. Philos. S5 (box)
 physiological motor control. Neural Netw. 9, Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360, 1051–1074 All liNks Are AcTive iN The oNliNe pdf
 1265–1279 (1996). (2005).


12 | ADvANcE oNlINE puBlIcATIoN www.nature.com/reviews/neuro

 © 2010 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved