Nature Reviews Neuroscience | AOP, published online 11 June 2008; doi:10.1038/nrn2357 REVIEWS


 A framework for studying the
 neurobiology of value-based
 decision making
 Antonio Rangel*, Colin Camerer* and P. Read Montague‡
 Abstract | Neuroeconomics is the study of the neurobiological and computational basis of
 value-based decision making. Its goal is to provide a biologically based account of human
 behaviour that can be applied in both the natural and the social sciences. This Review
 proposes a framework to investigate different aspects of the neurobiology of decision
 making. The framework allows us to bring together recent findings in the field, highlight
 some of the most important outstanding problems, define a common lexicon that bridges
 the different disciplines that inform neuroeconomics, and point the way to future applications.

 Value-based decision making is pervasive in nature. In this Review we propose a framework for think-
 It occurs whenever an animal makes a choice from ing about decision making. It has three components:
 several alternatives on the basis of a subjective value first, it divides decision-making computations into five
 that it places on them. Examples include basic animal types; second, it shows that there are multiple types of
 behaviours, such as bee foraging, and complicated valuation systems; and third, it incorporates modulat-
 human decisions, such as trading in the stock market. ing variables that affect the different valuation processes.
 Neuroeconomics is a relatively new discipline that stud- This framework will allow us to bring together recent
 ies the computations that the brain carries out in order findings in the field, highlight some of the most impor-
 to make value-based decisions, as well as the neural tant outstanding problems, define a common lexicon
 implementation of those computations. It seeks to build that bridges the different disciplines that inform neuro­
 a biologically sound theory of how humans make deci- economics, and point the way to future applications. The
 sions that can be applied in both the natural and the development of a common lexicon is important because
 social sciences. a lot of confusion has been introduced into the literature
 The field brings together models, tools and tech- on the neurobiology of decision making by the use of
 niques from several disciplines. Economics provides the unqualified terms ‘reward’ and ‘value’; as shown
 a rich class of choice paradigms, formal models of the in the Review, these terms could apply to very different
 subjective variables that the brain needs to compute to computations.
 make decisions, and some experimental protocols for
 how to measure these variables. Psychology provides a Computations involved in decision making
*Division of the Humanities wealth of behavioural data that shows how animals learn The first part of the framework divides the computations
and Social Sciences (HSS) and
Computational and Neural
 and choose under different conditions, as well as theories that are required for value-based decision making into
Systems Program, California about the nature of those processes. Neuroscience pro- five basic processes (FIG. 1). The categorization that we
Institute of Technology, vides the knowledge of the brain and the tools to study propose is based on existing theoretical models of deci-
Pasadena, California 91125, the neural events that attend decision making. Finally, sion making in economics, psychology and computer
USA. ‡Department of
 computer science provides computational models of science1–3. Most models in these disciplines assume,
Neuroscience, Computational
Psychiatry Unit, Baylor machine learning and decision making. Ultimately, it sometimes implicitly, that all of these processes are
College of Medicine, Houston, is the computations that are central to uniting these carried out every time an animal makes a value-based
Texas 77030, USA. disparate levels of description, as computational models decision.
Correspondence to A.R. identify the kinds of signals and signal dynamics that are The first process in decision making involves the
e-mail:
rangel@hss.caltech.edu
 required by different value-dependent learning and deci- computation of a representation of the decision prob-
doi:10.1038/nrn2357 sion problems. However, a full understanding of choice lem. This entails identifying internal states (for example,
Published online 11 June 2008 will require a description at all these levels. hunger level), external states (for example, threat level)


nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

 Representation and external states that inform those valuations. For
 Set of feasible actions? example, the valuation that a predator assigns to the
 Internal states? action ‘chasing prey’ is likely to depend on its level of
 External states?
 hunger (an internal state) as well as the conditions
 of the terrain (an external variable). Unfortunately, little
 is known about the computational and neurobiological
 Learning Valuation basis of this step. Basic open questions include: how does
Update the representation, valuation What is the value of each action the brain determine which actions to assign values to,
 and action-selection processes (given the internal and external states)? and thus consider in the decision-making process, and
 which actions to ignore? Is there a limit to the number
 of actions that animals can consider at a time? How are
 internal and external states computed? How are the states
 Action selection passed to the valuation mechanisms described below?
 Choose actions based on valuations

 Valuation at the time of choice
 On the basis of a sizable body of animal and human
 Outcome evaluation behavioural evidence, several groups have proposed the
 How desirable are the outcomes and existence of three different types of valuation systems:
 states that followed the action? Pavlovian, habitual and goal-directed systems4–6 (BOX. 1).
 These systems are sometimes in agreement but often in
Figure 1 | Basic computations involved in making a choice. Value-based decision conflict (see section on action selection). It is important
making can be broken down into five basic processes: first, the construction of a
 Natureinternal
 Reviewsand
 | Neuroscience to emphasize that the precise neural basis of these three
representation of the decision problem, which entails identifying external
 distinct valuation systems is yet to fully be established.
states as well as potential courses of action; second, the valuation of the different actions
under consideration; third, the selection of one of the actions on the basis of their Although the evidence described below points to neural
valuations; fourth, after implementing the decision the brain needs to measure the dissociations between some of the components of the
desirability of the outcomes that follow; and finally, the outcome evaluation is used to three hypothetical systems, it is possible that they do not
update the other processes to improve the quality of future decisions. map directly onto completely separate neural systems6–9.
 In fact, it is likely that they share common elements.
 Moreover, even the exact nature and number of valuation
 and potential courses of action (for example, pursue systems is still being debated. Nevertheless, conceptually
 prey). In the second process, the different actions that the three systems provide a useful operational division
 are under consideration need to be assigned a value of the valuation problem according to the style of the
 (valuation). In order to make appropriate decisions, computations that are performed by each.
 these values have to be reliable predictors of the benefits
 that are likely to result from each action. Third, the dif- Pavlovian systems. Pavlovian systems assign values to
 ferent values need to be compared for the animal to be a small set of behaviours that are evolutionarily appro-
 able to make a choice (action selection). Fourth, after priate responses to particular environmental stimuli.
 implementing the decision, the brain needs to measure Typical examples include preparatory behaviours (such
 the desirability of the outcomes. Finally, these feedback as approaching cues that predict the delivery of food) and
 measures are used to update the other processes to consummatory responses to a reward (such as pecking at
 improve the quality of future decisions (learning). a food magazine). Analogously, cues that predict a punish-
 The five categories are not rigid, and many ques- ment or the presence of an aversive stimulus can lead to
 tions remain about how well they match the computa- avoidance behaviours. We refer to these types of behav-
 tions that are made by the brain. For example, it is not iours as Pavlovian behaviours, and to the systems that
 known whether valuation (step 2 in our model) must assign value to them as the Pavlovian valuation systems.
 occur before action selection (step 3), or whether both Many Pavlovian behaviours are innate, or ‘hard-
 computations are performed in parallel. Nevertheless, the wired’, responses to specific predetermined stimuli.
 taxonomy is conceptually useful because it breaks down However, with sufficient training animals can also
 the decision-making process into testable constituent learn to deploy them in response to other stimuli. For
 processes, it organizes the neuroeconomics literature in example, rats and pigeons learn to approach lights that
 terms of the computations that are being studied, and predict the delivery of food. An important difference
 it makes predictions about the neurobiology of deci- between Pavlovian systems and the other two systems
 sion making, such as the hypothesis that the brain must is that Pavlovian systems assign value to only a small set
 encode distinct value signals at the decision and outcome of ‘prepared’ behaviours and thus have a limited behav-
 stages, and the hypothesis that the brain computes a value ioural repertoire. Nonetheless, a wide range of human
 signal for every course of action under consideration. behaviours that have important economic consequences
 might be controlled by Pavlovian systems, such as
 Representation overeating in the presence of food, behaviours displayed
 The representation process plays an essential part in in people with obsessive–compulsive disorders (OCDs)
 decision making by identifying the potential courses of and, perhaps, harvesting immediate smaller rewards at
 action that need to be evaluated, as well as the internal the expense of delayed larger rewards5,9.


 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
 REVIEWS

 It is not currently known how many Pavlovian sys-
 Box 1 | Examples of behaviours driven by different valuation systems
 tems exist or how they interact with each other. Other
 Valuation Valence important questions are whether there is a common
 system
 Appetitive (rewards) Avoidance (punishments)
 carrier of Pavlovian value and, if so, how it is encoded;
 whether learning is possible within these systems; and
 Pavlovian Eat all food on plate Cross street upon seeing how Pavlovian systems interact with the other valu-
 dangerous person
 ation systems — for example, in phenomena such as
 Reward obtained: food Punishment avoided: potential Pavlovian-instrumental transfer4.
 harm
 Habitual Morning cup of coffee Drive usual route to work Habit systems. In contrast to Pavlovian systems, which
 Reward obtained: stimulant Punishment avoided:traffic value only a small set of responses, habit systems can
 Goal-directed Movie selection Go for a run learn, through repeated training, to assign values to
 a large number of actions. Habit-valuation systems
 Reward obtained: Punishment avoided: obesity
 entertainment have a number of key characteristics. First, they learn
 to assign values to stimulus–response associations
 Behaviour can be driven by different valuation systems. These systems can operate in (which indicate the action that should be taken in a
 the domain of rewards (that is, appetitive outcomes) and punishments (that is, aversive
 particular state of the world), on the basis of previous
 outcomes). Although the exact number of valuation systems and their scope remain to
 be determined, it is known that behaviour can be influenced by Pavlovian, habitual and
 experience, through a process of trial-and-error (see
 goal-directed evaluators. The table contains examples of behaviours that are the learning section below). Second, subject to some
 characteristic of each system. Consummatory actions, such as eating food that is within technical qualifications, habit systems learn to assign a
 reach, are assigned a high value by the Pavlovian system regardless of the state of value to actions that is commensurate with the expected
 hunger. Routine actions, such as having a cup of coffee in the morning, are assigned a reward that these actions generate, as long as sufficient
 high value by the habitual system regardless of that morning’s particular needs. Choices practice is provided and the environment is sufficiently
 that are made infrequently, such as which movie to see, are assigned values by the stable3,6,16. Third, because values are learned by trial-
 goal-directed system. and-error, habit systems are believed to learn relatively
 slowly. As a consequence, they might forecast the value
 of actions incorrectly immediately after a change in the
 At first glance, Pavlovian behaviours look like action–reward contingencies. Finally, these systems
 automatic, stimulus-triggered responses, and not like rely on ‘generalization’ when assigning action values in
 instances of value-based choice. However, as Pavlovian novel situations. For example, a rat that has learned to
 responses can be interrupted by other brain systems, lever-press for liquids in response to a sound cue might
 they must be assigned something akin to a ‘value’ so that respond with a similar behaviour when first exposed to
 they can compete with the actions that are favoured by a light cue. We refer to the actions that are controlled by
 the other valuation systems. these systems as ‘habits’ and the values that they compute
 Characterizing the computational and neural basis of as ‘habit values’. Examples of habits include a smoker’s
 Pavlovian systems has so far proven difficult. This is due desire to have a cigarette at particular times of day (for
 in part to the fact that there might be multiple Pavlovian example, after a meal) and a rat’s tendency to forage in a
 controllers, some of which might be responsible for trig- cue-dependent location after sufficient training.
 gering outcome-specific responses (for example, peck- Studies using several species and methods suggest that
 ing at food or licking at water) whereas others might be the dorsolateral striatum might play a crucial part in the
 responsible for triggering more general valence-dependent control of habits17,18. As discussed below, the projections
 responses (for example, approaching for positive of dopamine neurons into this area are believed to be
 outcomes or withdrawing from negative ones). important for learning the value of actions. Furthermore,
 The neural bases of active and passive Pavlovian it has been suggested that stimulus–response represen-
 responses to negative stimuli seem to have specific and tations might be encoded in cortico-thalamic loops18.
 spatial organizations along an axis of the dorsal peri- Lesion studies in rats have shown that the infralimbic
 aqueductal grey10. With respect to valence-dependent cortex is necessary for the establishment and deployment
 responses, studies that used various species and methods of habits19,20.
 suggested that a network that includes the basolateral There are many open questions regarding habit sys-
 amygdala, the ventral striatum and the orbitofrontal tems. Are there multiple habit systems? How do habitual
 cortex (OFC) underlies the learning processes through systems value delayed rewards? What are the limits on the
 which neutral stimuli become predictive of the value of complexity of the environments in which the habit system
 outcomes11,12. In particular, the amygdala has been shown can learn to compute adequate action values? How does
 to play a crucial part in influencing some Pavlovian the system incorporate risk and uncertainty? How much
 responses8,13–15. Specifically, the central nucleus of the amyg­ generalization is there from one state to another in this
 dala, through its connections to the brainstem nuclei and system (for example, from hunger to thirst)?
 the core of the nucleus accumbens, seems to be involved
 in nonspecific preparatory responses, whereas the baso- Goal-directed systems. In contrast to the habit system, the
Valence
 lateral complex of the amygdala seems to be involved goal-directed system assigns values to actions by comput-
The appetitive or aversive in more specific responses through its connections ing action–outcome associations and then evaluating the
nature of a stimulus. to the hypothalamus and the periaqueductal grey. rewards that are associated with the different outcomes.


nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

 Under ideal conditions, the value that is assigned to an evaluated by the goal-directed system. This highlights a
 action equals the average reward to which it might lead. limitation of the goal-directed system: the quality of its
 We refer to values computed by this system as ‘goal val- valuations is limited by the quality of the action–outcome
 ues’ and to the actions that it controls as ‘goal-directed associations that it uses.
 behaviours’. An example of a goal-directed behaviour is
 the decision of what to eat at a new restaurant. Outstanding issues. Some general, important ques-
 Note that an important difference between habitual tions regarding the different valuation systems remain
 and goal-directed systems has to do with how they unanswered. First, are there multiple Pavlovian, habitual
 respond to changes in the environment. Consider, for and goal-directed valuation systems, with each system
 example, the valuations made by a rat that has learned to specializing in particular classes of actions (in the case
 press a lever to obtain food, after it is fed to satiation. The of the Pavlovian and habit systems) or outcomes (in the
 goal-directed system has learned to associate the action case of the goal-directed system)? For example, consider
 ‘lever-press’ with the outcome ‘food’ and thus assigns a a dieter who is offered a tasty dessert at a party. If this
 value to the lever-press that is equal to the current value is a novel situation, it is likely to be evaluated by the
 of food — which in this example is low because the goal-directed system. The dieter is likely to experience
 animal has been fed to satiation. By contrast, the habit conflict between going for the taste of the dessert and
 system assigns a high value to the lever-press because sticking to his health goals. This might entail a conflict
 this is the value that it learned during the pre-satiation between two goal-directed systems, one that is focused
 training. Thus, the goal-directed system updates the on the evaluation of immediate taste rewards and one
 value of an action as soon as the value of its outcome that is focused on the evaluation of long-term outcomes.
 changes, whereas the habit system does not. Second, are there more than three valuation systems?
 To carry out the necessary computations, the goal- Lengyel and Dayan5,33 have proposed the existence of an
 directed system needs to store action–outcome and additional, ‘episodic’ system. At this point it is unclear
 outcome–value associations. Unfortunately, relatively how such a system differs both conceptually and neu-
 little is known about the neural basis of these processes. rally from the goal-directed system. Third, how does
 Several rat lesion studies suggest that the dorsomedial the brain implement the valuation computations of the
 striatum has a role in the learning and expression of different systems? Finally, how do long-term goals, cul-
 action–outcome associations21, whereas the OFC might tural norms and moral considerations get incorporated
 be responsible for encoding outcome–value associa- into the valuation process? One possibility is that the
 tions. Consistent with this, monkey electrophysiology habit and goal-directed systems treat violations of these
 studies have found appetitive goal-value signals in goals and cultural and moral rules as aversive outcomes,
 the OFC and in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and that compliance with them is treated as a reward-
 (DLPFC)22–25. Electrophysiology experiments in rats ing outcome34. However, this can be the case only if the
 point to the same conclusion 26. In a further conver- brain has developed the capacity to incorporate social
 gence of findings across methods and species, human and moral considerations into its standard valuation
 functional MRI (fMRI) studies have shown that blood- circuitry. Another possibility is that there are separate
 oxygen-level-dependent (BOLD) activity in the medial valuation systems for these types of considerations that
 OFC27–31 and the DLPFC28 correlates with behavioural are yet to be discovered.
 measures of appetitive goal values, and individuals
 with damage to the medial OFC have problems making Modulators of the valuation systems
 consistent appetitive choices32. Several lines of evidence Several factors can affect the values that the Pavlovian,
 from these various methods also point to an involve- habitual and goal-directed systems assign to actions. For
 ment of the basolateral amygdala and the mediodorsal example, the value that is assigned to an action might
 thalamus (which, in combination with the DLPFC, depend on the riskiness of its associated payoffs, the
 form a network that Balleine has called the “associative delay which with those payoffs occur and the social
 cortico-basal-ganglia loop” (Ref. 17)). context. We refer to these types of variables as value
 Several questions regarding this system remain modulators. Importantly, modulators might have dif-
 un­answered. Are there specialized goal-directed systems ferent effects in each of the valuation systems. In this
 for reward and punishment, and for different types of section we focus on the impact of risk and delay on the
 goals? How are action–outcome associations learned? goal-directed valuation system, as most of the existing
 How does the goal-directed system assign value to famil- evidence pertains to this system. For reviews on social
 iar and unfamiliar outcomes? How are action–outcome modulators, see REFS 35,36.
 associations activated at the time that a choice has to
 be made? Risk and uncertainty. All decisions involve some degree
 For complex economic choices (such as choosing of risk, in the sense that action–outcome associations
 among detailed health-care plans), we speculate that, are probabilistic (BOX 2). We refer to an action that has
 in humans, propositional logic systems have a role in uncertain rewards as a ‘prospect’. In order to make good
Propositional logic system constructing associations that are subsequently evalu- decisions, the goal-directed system needs to take into
A cognitive system that makes
predictions about the world on
 ated by the goal-directed system. For example, individu- account the likelihood of the different outcomes. Two
the basis of known pieces of als might use a propositional system to try to forecast hotly debated questions are: first, what are the computa-
information. the consequences of a particular action, which are then tions that the goal-directed system uses to incorporate


 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
 REVIEWS

 Statistical moments risks into its valuations; and second, how does the brain asserts that the brain assigns value to prospects by first
 Properties of a distribution, implement such computations37? computing its statistical moments (such as its expected
 such as mean and variance. Early human neuroimaging studies in this topic identi- magnitude, its variance or coefficient of variation, and
 fied some of the areas that are involved in making risky its skewness) and then aggregating them into a value
 decisions, but were not able to characterize the nature of the signal42,43. The second view, which is widely used in other
 computations made by these systems38–41. Currently, two areas of economics and in psychology, asserts that the
 main competing views regarding the nature of such com- value is computed using either expected-utility theory (EU)
 putations are being tested. The first view, which is widely or prospect theory (PT) (BOX 2). In this case the brain needs
 used in financial economics and behavioural ecology, to compute a utility value for each potential outcome,
 which is then weighted by a function of the probabilities.
 Decisions that result from an EU or PT valuation
 function can be approximated by a weighted sum of
 Box 2 | Risk modulators of value in the goal-directed system
 the prospects’ statistical moments (and vice versa). This
 Many decisions involve a Expected utility b Prospect theory makes it difficult to distinguish the two views on the basis
 the valuation of rewards v(x) v(x) of behavioural data alone. Neuroimaging studies can
 and costs that occur provide important insights, although the debate between
 probabilistically, often the two views has not yet been settled. In agreement
 called ‘prospects’. There
 with the first view, a number of recent human fMRI
 are two dominant x x studies have found activity that is consistent with the
 theories in economics
 about how valuation presence of expected value signals in the striatum44,45 and
 systems incorporate the medial OFC46, and activity that is consistent with risk
 probability in the signals (as measured by the mathematical variance of
 assignment of value. In the prospects) in the striatum44,47, the insula46,48 and the
 expected-utility theory c Expected utility d Prospect theory lateral OFC45. Similar risk and expected-value signals
 (EU), the value of a π(p) π(p) have been found in the midbrain dopamine system in
 prospect equals the sum electrophysiology studies in non-human primates49.
 of the value of the Expected-value signals (BOX 2) have also been found in
 individual outcomes,
 the lateral intraparietal cortex in non-human primate
 v(x), weighted by their
 electrophysiology experiments50. Consistent with the
 objective probability,
 p(x), which is given by second view, a recent human fMRI study found evidence
 p p
 Σxp(x)v(x) . Under some for a PT-like value signal in a network that includes the
 special assumptions on ventral and dorsal striatum, the ventromedial and ventro­
 the function v(.), which are popular in the study of financialNature
 markets, the EU
 Reviews | formula
 Neuroscience lateral prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex
 boils down to a weighted sum of the expected value and the variance of the prospect42. (ACC) and some midbrain dopaminergic regions 27.
 The appeal of EU comes from the fact that it is consistent with plausible normative The existence of evidence that is consistent with both
ature Reviews | axioms
 Neuroscience
 for decision making, from its mathematical tractability and from its success in views presents an apparent puzzle. A potential resolu-
 explaining some aspects of market behaviour. An alternative approach, called prospect tion that should be explored in future studies is that the
 theory (PT), states that the value of a prospect equals Σx π(p(x))v(x – r), where the values
 striatal-prefrontal network might integrate the statistical
 of the outcomes now depend on a reference point, r, and are weighted by a nonlinear
 moments that are encoded elsewhere into a value signal
 function, π(.), of the objective probabilities122,123. Reference-dependence can create
 framing effects (analogous to figure–ground switches in vision), in which different that exhibits EU- or PT-like properties.
 values are assigned to the same prospect depending on which reference point is In many circumstances, decision makers have
 cognitively prominent. The figure illustrates the usual assumptions that are imposed incomplete knowledge of the risk parameters — a situa-
 in the value and probability functions by the twoNature Reviews
 theories. Neuroscience
 As| shown in parts a and c, in tion known as ambiguity that is different from the pure
 EU the value function, v(.), is a concave function of outcomes, and the probability risk case in which the probabilities are known. Human
 function is the identity function. Note that a special case that is often used in the behavioural studies have shown that people generally
 experimental neuroeconomics literature is v(x) = x, which makes the EU function reduce have an aversion to choices that are ambiguous51, which
 to the expected value of the prospect. The properties of PT are illustrated in parts b and suggests that a parameter that measures the amount of
 d. The value function is usually revealed by choices to be concave for gains but convex ambiguity might be encoded in the brain and might be
 for losses. This assumption is justified by the psychologically plausible assumption of
 used to modulate the value signal. Some preliminary
 diminished marginal sensitivity to both gains and losses starting from the reference
 point. PT also assumes that v(x) < –v(–x) for x > 0, a property called ‘loss-aversion’, which human fMRI evidence points to the amygdala, the OFC52
 leads to a kink in the value function. Part d illustrates the version of PT in which small and the anterior insula53 as areas where such a parameter
 probabilities are overweighted and large probabilities are underweighted. PT has been might be encoded.
 successful in explaining some behaviour that was inconsistent with EU theory in Some issues regarding risk and valuation are still
 behavioural experiments with humans123 and monkeys124, as well as economic field unclear. First, little is known about how risk affects the
 evidence125. computation of value in Pavlovian and habitual systems.
 Neuroeconomists make a distinction between prospects that involve risk and those For example, most reinforcement learning models (see
 that involve ambiguity. Risk refers to a situation in which all of the probabilities are below) assume that the habit learning system encodes a
 known. Ambiguity refers to a situation in which some of the probabilities are unknown.
 value signal that incorporates expected values but not
 The EU and PT models described above apply to valuation under risk, but not under
 risks. This assumption, however, has not been thoroughly
 ambiguity. Several models of valuation under ambiguity have been proposed, but none
 of them has received strong empirical support51,126,127. tested. Second, little is known about how the brain learns
 the risk parameters. For example, some behavioural


 nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

Expected-utility theory evidence suggests that habit and goal-directed systems is differentially activated when subjects decide to take
A theory that states that the learn about probabilities in different ways and that risks for large gains and when they decide to accept a
value of a prospect (or of this leads to different probability weighting by the two sure loss56.
random rewards) equals systems54. Finally, more work is required to better char-
the sum of the value of the
potential outcomes weighted
 acterize the nature of the computations that are made Time discounting. In all real-world situations there is
by their probability. by the amygdala and the insula in decision making a time lag between decisions and outcomes. From a
 under uncertainty. Preliminary insights suggest that the range of behavioural experiments it is well-established
Prospect theory amygdala might have an asymmetric role in the evalu- that the goal-directed and habitual systems assign lower
An alternative to the expected
 ation of gains and losses. For example, humans with values to delayed rewards than to immediate ones; this
utility theory that also pertains
to how to evaluate prospects.
 amygdala damage made poor decisions if the deci- phenomenon is known as time discounting57. The role
 sions involved potential gains, but not if they involved of time discounting in the Pavlovian system is not as
 losses55, and a related study showed that the amygdala well-understood. As before, we focus on the impact of
 temporal discounting on the goal-directed system, as
 this is where most of the studies so far have focused.
 Box 3 | Temporal modulators of value in the goal-directed system The current understanding of time discounting
 parallels that for risk: two competing views have been
 a Exponential b proposed and are being tested using a combination of
 RB human-behavioural and neuroimaging experiments.
 R RA One camp interprets the human fMRI evidence using
 the perspective of dual-process psychological models and
 has argued that discounting results from the interaction
 v = γ tR of at least two different neural valuation systems (BOX 3),
 one with a low discount rate and one with a high dis-
 count rate58–60. In this view, the patience that is exhibited
 t t 0 t′ by any given individual when making decisions depends
 c Hyperbolic d on the relative activation of these two systems. In sharp
 contrast, the other camp has presented human fMRI
 RB
 R evidence that suggests that there is a single valuation sys-
 RA tem that discounts future rewards either exponentially
 or hyperbolically61 (BOX 3). As with the situation for risk
 valuation, this presents an apparent puzzle. A potential
 v = R /(1 + kt) reconciliation is that the striatal-prefrontal network
 might integrate information that is encoded elsewhere
 in the brain into a single value signal, but that immedi-
 t t 0 t′
 ate and delayed outcomes might activate different types
 Many decisions involve the evaluation of rewards and costs that arrive with different of information that are used to compute the value. For
 delays. Thus, the valuation systems require a mechanism forNatureincorporating
 Reviews |the timing of
 Neuroscience example, immediate rewards might activate ‘immediacy
 rewards into their computations. Two prominent models of discounting have been
 markers’ that increase the valuation signals in the striatal-
 proposed in psychology and economics. In the first model, known as hyperbolic
 discounting, rewards and costs that arrive t units of time in the future are discounted by
 prefrontal network. An understanding of these issues is
 a factor 1/(1+kt). Note that the discount factor is a hyperbolic function of time and that a also important from the perspective of brain develop-
 smaller k is associated with less discounting (that is, more patience). In the second ment. When do value signals get computed in their ‘adult’
 model, known as exponential discounting, the corresponding discount factor is g t. Note form and how do they contribute to choices made by chil-
 that a value of g closer to one is associated with more patience. An important distinction dren and adolescents? These and other related questions
 between the two models is illustrated in parts a and c of the figure, which depict the show that the economic framing of decision making will
 value of a reward of size R t units of time before it arrives. Note that whereas every continue to provide new ways to probe the development
 additional delay is discounted at the same rate (g) in the exponential case, in hyperbolic and function of choice mechanisms in humans.
 discounting initial delays are discounted at a much higher rate and the discount curve Time discounting remains a fruitful topic of investiga-
 flattens out for additional delays.
 tion. First, the discounting properties of Pavlovian and
 In most comparative behavioural studies of goal-directed behaviour with adequate
 statistical power, hyperbolic discount functions always fit the observed behaviour
 habitual systems in humans have not been systematically
 better than exponential functions57. Nevertheless, economists and computer scientists explored. Second, the inputs to the valuation network are
 find the exponential function appealing because it is the only discount function that unknown, as is the reason why the aggregation of those
 satisfies the normative principle of dynamic consistency, which greatly simplifies inputs produces a hyperbolic-like signal in valuation
 modelling. This property requires that if a reward, A, is assigned a higher value than areas such as the ventral striatum and the medial OFC.
 another reward, B, at time t, then the same reward is also assigned a higher value when Third, the behavioural evidence suggests that discount
 evaluated at any time t–k. Under hyperbolic discounting, by contrast, the relative factors are highly dependent on contextual variables.
 valuation between the two actions depends on when the choice is made. This is known For example, subjects’ willingness to delay gratification
 as dynamic inconsistency. Parts b and d of the figure illustrate this difference. They depends on whether the choice is phrased as a “delay”
 depict the comparative value of a reward, RA, received at time 0 with a reward, RB,
 or as a “choice between two points in time” (Ref. 62), on
 received at time t′ as a function of the time when the rewards are being evaluated. Note
 that in the exponential case the relative desirability of the two rewards is constant,
 how they are instructed to think about the rewards63
 whereas for the hyperbolic case it depends on the time of evaluation. and on the subjects’ arousal level64. The mechanisms
 through which such variables affect the valuation process


 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
 REVIEWS

 Pavlovian Habitual Goal-directed
 Example: hungry animal Example: animal rewarded for Example: individual
 presented with food and running away from food considering taking an extra
 electric shock simultaneously bite after feeling full


 Pavlovian
 Appetitive Pavlovian system: Appetitive Pavlovian system: Appetitive Pavlovian
 high value for food, low high value for running system: high value for food
 value for escape behaviours towards food

 Avoidance Pavlovian system: Avoidance habitual system: Health goal-directed
 high value for escape high value for running away system: low value for food
 behaviours, low value for from food
 food

 Example: an animal trained to Example: alcoholic
 run towards a lever in response considering having a drink
 to a sound and away from a at a bar
 lever in response to a light being
 presented with both stimuli

 Habitual Approach habitual system: Appetitive habitual system:
 high value for lever approach high value for drink

 Avoidance habitual system: Avoidance goal-directed
 high value for lever avoidance system: low value for drink

 Example: dieter considering
 having ice-cream


 Goal-directed
 Appetitive goal-directed
 system: high value for
 ice-cream

 Avoidance goal-directed
 system: low value for
 ice-cream

 Figure 2 | Conflict between the valuation systems. The different valuation systems are often in agreement. For
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
 example, when an individual is hungry at meal time, the Pavlovian, habitual and goal-directed systems assign high value to
 the consumption of food. However, conflicts between the systems are also common and might lead to poor decision
 making. This figure provides examples of conflict among the different valuation systems and of conflict among different
 value signals of the same type.


 are unknown. Fourth, several studies have shown that proposals have been made, but the experimental evi-
 the anticipation of future rewards and punishments dence is scarce. Daw et al.77 have suggested that the brain
 can affect subjects’ behavioural discount rates 65,66. arbitrates between the habit and goal-directed valuation
 The mechanisms through which anticipation affects systems by assigning control to the system that at any
 valuation are also unknown. Finally, animals make very given time has the less uncertain estimate of the true
 myopic choices that are consistent with large hyperbolic value of the actions. As the quality of the estimates that
 discount rates67–70. How do humans and animals differ are made by the habit system increases with experience,
 in the way in which they incorporate temporal delays this means in practice that the habit system should gradu-
 into the valuation process? ally take over from the goal-directed system34. Frank has
 proposed a neural-network model for choice between
 Action selection appetitive and aversive habitual valuations78,79.
 Even for choices that involve only one of the valuation Understanding how the ‘control assignment’ prob-
 systems discussed above, options with different val- lem is resolved is important for several reasons. First, as
 ues need to be compared in order to make a decision. illustrated in FIG. 2 and as emphasized by Dayan et al.9,
Dual-process models Little is known about how the brain does this. The only many apparently puzzling behaviours are likely to arise
A class of psychological models available theoretical models come from the literature as a result of the conflict between the different valuation
in which two processes with on perceptual decision making, which has modelled binary systems. Second, in most circumstances the quality of
different properties compete
 perceptual choices as a race-to-barrier diffusion process71–76. decision making depends on the brain’s ability to assign
to determine the outcome of a
computation. However, it is unclear whether this class of model also control to the valuation system that makes the best value
 applies to value-based decision making and, if so, how the forecasts. For example, it is probably optimal to assign
Race-to-barrier diffusion models might be extended to cases of multi-action choice. control to the habit system in familiar circumstances,
process Another issue is the competition that arises among the but not in rapidly changing environments. Third, some
A stochastic process that
terminates when the variable
 different valuation systems when an animal has to make a decision-making pathologies (for example, OCD and
of interest reaches a certain choice between several potential actions that are assigned overeating) might be due to an inability to assign control
threshold value. conflicting values (FIG. 2). Some preliminary theoretical to the appropriate system.


nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

 There are many important open questions in the they were smelling cheddar cheese or a sweaty sock83. In
 domain of action selection. First, in the case of goal- another study99, activity in the medial OFC in response
 directed decisions, does the brain make decisions by to the consumption of wine depended on beliefs about
 comparing the value of outcomes, of the actions that are its price, and a third study 84 showed that the outcome-
 necessary to achieve those outcomes, or both? Second, valuation signal after consumption of soda depended on
 what is the neural basis of the action-selection processes beliefs about its brand. Together, these findings suggest
 in the Pavlovian, habitual and goal-directed systems? that the outcome-valuation system is modulated by
 Third, what are the neural mechanisms that are used to higher cognitive processes that determine expectancies
 arbitrate between the different controllers, and is there and beliefs.
 a hierarchy of controllers so that some (for example, Much remains to be understood about the outcome-
 Pavlovian systems) tend to take precedence over others valuation system. What network is responsible for com-
 (for example, goal-directed systems)? Fourth, are there puting positive and negative outcome values in different
 any neural markers that can be reliably used to identify types of domains? How are positive and negative outcome-
 goal-directed or habitual behavioural control? valuation signals integrated? How are these signals passed
 to the learning processes described in the next section?
 Outcome evaluation Can they be modulated by variables such as long-term
 In order to learn how to make good decisions the brain goals, social norms and moral considerations?
 needs to compute a separate value signal that measures
 the desirability of the outcomes that were generated by Learning
 its previous decisions. For example, it is useful for an ani- Although some Pavlovian behaviours are innate
 mal to know whether the last food that it consumed led responses to environmental stimuli, most forms of
 to illness so that it can know whether it ought to avoid behaviour involve some form of learning. In fact, in
 that food in the future. order to make good choices animals need to learn how
 The computations that are made by the outcome- to deploy the appropriate computations during the dif-
 evaluation system, as well as the neural basis of these ferent stages of decision making. First, the brain must
 computations, are slowly beginning to be understood. learn to activate representations of the most advanta-
 The existing evidence comes from several different geous behaviours in every state. This is a non-trivial
 methods and species. Human fMRI studies have shown learning problem given that animals and humans have
 that activity in the medial OFC at the time that a reward limited computational power, and yet they can deploy
 is being enjoyed correlates with subjective reports about a large number of behavioural responses. Second, the
 the quality of the experience — this has been shown for valuation systems must learn to assign to actions values
 olfactory80–83, gustatory84–86 and even musical rewards87. that match their anticipated rewards. Finally, the action-
 Moreover, the activity in the medial OFC parallels the selection processes need to learn how to best allocate
 reduction in outcome value that one would expect after control among the different valuation systems.
 a subject is fed to satiation88,89. This suggests that the Of all of these processes, the one that is best-
 medial OFC might be an area where positive outcome understood is the learning of action values by the habit
 valuations are computed. Interestingly, other human system. In this area there has been a productive inter-
 fMRI studies have found positive responses in the play between theoretical models from computer science
 medial OFC to the receipt of secondary reinforcers, such (BOX 4) and experiments using electrophysiology in rats
 as monetary payoffs90–92. Analogous results have been and monkeys and fMRI in humans. In particular, various
 found for negative experiences: in humans, subjective reinforcement learning models have been proposed to
 reports of pain intensity correlated with activity in the describe the computations that are made by the habit
 insula and the ACC93,94. system3,100. The basic idea behind these models is that a
 Animal studies have also provided insight into the prediction-error signal is computed after observing the
 neural basis of the outcome-value signal. A recent electro­ outcome generated by every choice. The signal is called
 physiology experiment in monkeys found outcome- a prediction error because it measures the quality of
 value signals in the dorsal ACC95. In addition, a series the forecast that was implicit in the previous valuation
 of provocative rat studies showed that it is possible to (BOX 4). Every time a learning event occurs, the value of
 increase outward manifestations of ‘liking’ in rats (for the actions is changed by an amount that is proportional
 example, tongue protrusions) by activating the nucleus to the prediction error. Over time, and under the appro-
 accumbens and subsets of the ventral pallidum using priate technical conditions, the animal learns to assign
 opioid agonists85,96–98. Interestingly, and consistent with the correct value to actions.
 the hypothesis that outcome-evaluation signals play a The existence of prediction-error-like signals in
 part in learning, rats that received opioid agonists sub- the brain is one of the best-documented facts in neuro­
 sequently consumed more of the reward that was paired economics. Schultz and colleagues initially observed
 with the agonist. such signals in electrophysiology studies performed
 Some recent human fMRI experiments have also in midbrain dopamine neurons of monkeys 101–106.
 provided novel insights into the computational proper- The connection between these signals and reinforce-
 ties of the outcome-value signal. For example, one study ment-learning models was made in a series of papers
 showed that activity in the medial OFC in response to by Montague and colleagues that were published in
 an odour depended on whether subjects believed that the 1990s103,107. Since then, several fMRI studies have


 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
 REVIEWS

 Box 4 | Reinforcement learning models action-value learning in the habitual system
 Several models from computer science have proved to be useful in modelling how the habitual system learns to assign
 values to actions. All of these models have the following structure, which is known as a Markovian decision problem: first,
 the animal can be in a finite set of states and can take a finite set of actions; second, there is a transition function, T(s,a,s’),
 that specifies the probability that state s and action a at one time-step will result in the state s′ at the next time-step; and
 third, at every time-step the animal obtains an action and a state-contingent reward, r(a,s). A behavioural rule in this
 world (called a policy and denoted by π(s)) specifies the action that the animal takes in every state. In this world the
 habitual system needs to solve two problems. First, given a policy, it needs to compute the value of taking every action a
 in every state s. This is given by
 Qπ(s, a) = E[rt + γrt + 1 + γ2rt + 2 + γ3rt + 3 + … | st = s, at = a, at + 1 = π(st + 1),…]; (1)
 where rt + k denotes the reward that is received at time t + k and where γ > 0 is the discount rate. Second, it needs to
 identify the policy that generates the largest sum of exponentially discounted rewards (see BOX 3) in every state.
 Nature
 How could the habitual system learn Qπ (s,a)? Reviews
 Let Qπ Neuroscience
 (s, a) |denote the estimate that the system has at any point in time.
 Equation 1 can be rewritten in recursive form as

 Qπ(s, a) = R (s) + γ Σ T (s, a, s´) Q π (s´, π (s´))
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience (2)
 s´∈S

 Consider an estimator, Q(s, ˆ a) , of Qπ(s, a) . Note that if Q(s,ˆ a) does not satisfy this expression, then it is not a good
 estimate of the value function. Define a prediction error
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
 ˆ t + 1,
 δt = rt + γ maxa´Nature
 [Q(s ˆ t, at)
 a´)] – |Q(s
 Reviews Neuroscience (3)
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
 that is a sample measure of how close the estimate is to satisfying equation 2. If δt = theγ max
 > r0t + valuea´ofˆthet + 1,
 [Q(s action ˆ t, at)
 a´)] –isQ(s
 overestimated; if δ
 Nature Reviews
 t =
 < r
 0 +
 theγ max
 value
 t | Neuroscience
 a´is ˆ
 [Q(s –
 underestimated.
 t+1, a´)] ˆ
 Q(s ,
 t ta )
 One can then use the prediction error to update the estimates of the
 action values as follows:
 Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
 Q(st, at) ← Q(sˆt, at) + ηδt Nature Reviews | Neuroscience
 ˆ (4)

 where η is a number between 0 and 1 that determines the speed of learning. This model is known as Q‑learning and it
 Nature Reviews
 satisfies | Neuroscience
 one important property: subject to some technical conditions, the estimated action values converge to those
 that are generated by the optimal policy. It then follows that the animal can learn the optimal policy simply by following
 this algorithm and, at every step of the learning process, selecting the actions with the largest values. Two other variants
 of this model have been proposed as descriptions of how the habitual system learns. They are known as SARSA and the
 actor–critic model. They differ from Q‑learning on the exact specification of the prediction error and the update rule, but
 they are based on essentially the same idea. Note that neither SARSA nor the actor–critic model is guaranteed to
 converge to the optimal policy.
 It is worth emphasizing several properties of these learning models. First, they are model-free in the sense that the
 animal is not assumed to know anything about the transition function or the reward function. Second, they explain a
 wide range of conditioning behaviours that are associated with the habitual system, such as blocking, overshadowing
 and inhibitory conditioning. Finally, they are computationally simple in the sense that they do not require the animal to
 keep track of long sequences of rewards to learn the value of actions.
 The reinforcement-learning models described here are often used to describe the process of action-value learning in
 the habitual system. The algorithms that the Pavlovian and goal-directed systems use to update their values based on
 feedback from the environment are currently unknown.


 shown that, in humans, the BOLD signal in the ventral electrophysiology experiment114 suggested that the mag-
 striatum (an important target of midbrain dopamine nitude of the negative prediction errors might be encoded
 neurons) correlates with prediction errors in a wide in the timing of the fire-and-pause patterns of the
 range of tasks29,90,108–113. dopamine cells115. Some human fMRI studies have found
 Although the existing evidence suggests that there is a a BOLD signal in the amygdala that resembles a nega-
 remarkable match between the computational models and tive prediction error108, but others have failed to replicate
 the activity of the dopamine system, recent experiments this finding and have instead found evidence for both
 have demonstrated that much remains to be understood. types of prediction error in different parts of the stria-
 First, a monkey electrophysiology study114 suggested that tum116. In turn, Daw and Dayan117 proposed that the two
 the phasic firing rates of midbrain dopamine neurons prediction-error signals are encoded by the phasic
 might only encode the positive component of the predic- responses of two neurotransmitter systems: dopamine
 tion error (henceforth the ‘positive prediction error’). for positive prediction errors and serotonin for negative
 This raises the question of which brain areas and neuro­ prediction errors. Second, it was shown that midbrain
 transmitter systems encode the negative component dopamine neurons adjust their firing rates to changes
 (henceforth the ‘negative prediction error’), which is in the magnitude of reward in a way that is inconsistent
 also essential for learning. Several possibilities have with the standard interpretation of prediction errors49.
 been proposed. A secondary analysis115 of the monkey The exact nature of these adjustments remains an open


nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

 Box 5 | From neuroeconomics to computational psychiatry
 Sometimes the brain’s decision-making processes function so differently from societal norms that we label the ensuing
 behaviours and perceptions a psychiatric disease. The medical community recognizes and categorizes them according
 to well-accepted diagnostic criteria that, so far, have relied mostly on collections of behavioural features. Neuroscientists
 have accumulated a substantial amount of neurobiological data that impinges directly on these illnesses128. For example,
 there are now animal models for nicotine addiction, anxiety, depression and schizophrenia that have produced a
 veritable flood of data on neurotransmitter systems, receptors and gene expression129,130. Thus, there is a substantial body
 of biological data and detailed descriptions of the behavioural outcomes, but little is known about what connects them.
 This situation presents an opportunity for neuroeconomics and other computationally oriented sciences to connect the
 growing body of biological knowledge to the behavioural end points.
 Computational models of reinforcement learning provide a new language for understanding mental illness and a
 starting point for connecting detailed neural substrates to behavioural outcomes. For example, reinforcement-learning
 models predict the existence of valuation malfunctions, in which a drug, a disease or a developmental event perturbs the
 brain’s capacity to assign appropriate value to behavioural acts or mental states34,131–133.
 Disorders of decision making can also arise at the action-selection stage, especially when there are conflicts among the
 valuation systems. This presents the possibility of generating a new quantifiable taxonomy of mental-disease states.
 Interestingly, this set of issues is closely related to the problem of how to think about the ‘will’ and has applications to
 addiction, obsessive–compulsive disorder and obesity. These issues relate directly to the idea of executive control and
 the way that it is affected by mental disease. It is our opinion that future progress in this area will require more
 computational approaches, because only through such models can competing ideas of executive control be clearly
 differentiated. Such efforts are already well underway, and various modelling efforts have been applied to executive
 control and decision making in humans79,134,135.
 Another neuroeconomics concept that is ripe for applications to psychiatry is motivation, which is a measure of how
 hard an animal works in order to retrieve a reward. Disorders of motivation might play an especially important part in
 mood disorders, such as depression, and in Parkinson’s disease78,136.


 question43. Finally, a study showed that the habit system three valuation systems seem to be at work, fighting over
 can also learn from observing the outcomes of actions the control of the decision-making process.
 that it did not take, as opposed to only being able to learn Nevertheless, several welcome developments suggest
 from direct experience118. This form of ‘fictive learning’ that the next 5 years will produce significant progress
 is not captured by traditional reinforcement-learning in answering many of the questions outlined here.
 models but is common in human strategic learning and First, there is the close connection between theory and
 suggests that the theory needs to be extended in new experiments, and the widespread use of theory-driven
 directions (to include, among others, imitative learning experimentation (including behavioural parameters
 from observing the actions of others)119. inferred from choices that can be linked across subjects
 Other important questions in the domain of value or trials to brain activity). Second, there is the rapid
 learning include the following: how does the goal- adoption of new technologies, such as fast cyclic vol-
 directed system learn the action-outcome and outcome- tammetry in freely moving animals121, which permits
 value representations that it needs to compute action quasi-real-time monitoring of neurotransmitter levels
 values? What are the limitations of the habit system in for long periods. Third, there is the investigation of
 situations in which there is a complex credit-assignment decision-making phenomena using different species
 problem (because actions and outcomes are not and experimental methods, which permits more rapid
 perfectly alternated) and delayed rewards? How does the progress.
 habit system learn to incorporate internal and external This is good news, because the range of potential
 states in its valuations and generalize across them? How applications is significant. The most important area in
 do the different learning systems incorporate expected which knowledge from neuroeconomics can be applied
 uncertainty about the feedback signals43? To what extent is psychiatry. Many psychiatric disorders involve a fail-
 can the different value systems learn by observation as ure of one or more of the decision-making processes
 opposed to through direct experience120? described here (BOX 5) . A better understanding of
 these processes should lead to improved diagnosis and
 The next 5 years and beyond treatment. Another area of application is the judicial
 Although neuroeconomics is a new field and many central system. A central question in many legal procedures
 questions remain to be answered, rapid progress is being is how to define and measure whether individuals are
 made. As illustrated by the framework provided in this in full command of their decision-making faculties.
 Review, the field now has a coherent lexicon and research Neuroeconomics has the potential to provide better
 aims. The key challenge for neuroeconomics over the next answers to this question. Similarly, an improved under-
 few years is to provide a systematic characterization of the standing of why people experience failures of self-control
 computational and neurobiological basis of the represen- should lead to better public-policy interventions in areas
Credit-assignment problem
The problem of crediting
 tation, valuation, action-comparision, outcome-valuation ranging from addiction and obesity to savings. The field
rewards to particular actions in and value-learning processes described above. This will also has the potential to improve our understanding of
complex environments. prove to be challenging because, as we have seen, at least how marketing affects decisions and when it should be


10 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
 REVIEWS

 regulated. Artificial intelligence is another fertile area neuro­economics might advance our understanding of how
 of application: a question of particular interest is which to train individuals to become better decision-makers,
 features of the brain’s decision-making mechanisms are especially in conditions of extreme time-pressure and
 optimal and should be imitated by artificial systems, large stakes, such as those that arise in policing, in war
 and which mechanisms can be improved upon. Finally, and in fast-paced financial markets.


1. Busemeyer, J. R. & Johnson, J. G. in Handbook of 22. Wallis, J. D. & Miller, E. K. Neuronal activity in 42. Bossaerts, P. & Hsu, M. in Neuroeconomics: Decision
 Judgment and Decision Making (eds Koehler, D. & primate dorsolateral and orbital prefrontal cortex Making and the Brain (eds Glimcher, P. W., Camerer,
 Narvey, N.) 133–154 (Blackwell Publishing Co., during performance of a reward preference task. Eur. C. F., Fehr, E. & Poldrack, R. A.) 351–364 (Elsevier,
 New York, 2004). J. Neurosci. 18, 2069–2081 (2003). New York, 2008).
2. Mas-Colell, A., Whinston, M. & Green, J. Microeconomic 23. Padoa-Schioppa, C. & Assad, J. A. Neurons in the 43. Preuschoff, K. & Bossaerts, P. Adding prediction risk
 Theory (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1995). orbitofrontal cortex encode economic value. Nature to the theory of reward learning. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
3. Sutton, R. S. & Barto, A. G. Reinforcement Learning: 441, 223–226 (2006). 1104, 135–146 (2007).
 An Introduction (MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, This paper showed that neurons in the monkey 44. Preuschoff, K., Bossaerts, P. & Quartz, S. R. Neural
 1998). OFC encode the goal value of individual rewarding differentiation of expected reward and risk in human
4. Dickison, A. & Balleine, B. W. in Steven’s Handbook of objects (for example, different liquids) irrespective subcortical structures. Neuron 51, 381–390 (2006).
 Experimental Psychology Vol. 3 Learning, Motivation of the action that needs to be taken to obtain them. 45. Tobler, P. N., O’Doherty, J. P., Dolan, R. J. &
 & Emotion (ed. Gallistel, C.) 497–533 (Wiley & Sons, 24. Wallis, J. D. Orbitofrontal cortex and its contribution Schultz, W. Reward value coding distinct from risk
 New York, 2002). to decision-making. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 31–56 attitude-related uncertainty coding in human reward
5. Dayan, P. in Better Than Conscious? Implications for (2007). systems. J. Neurophysiol. 97, 1621–1632 (2007).
 Performance and Institutional Analysis (eds Engel, C. 25. Barraclough, D. J., Conroy, M. L. & Lee, D. Prefrontal 46. Rolls, E. T., McCabe, C. & Redoute, J. Expected
 & Singer, W.) 51–70 (MIT Press, Cambridge, cortex and decision making in a mixed-strategy game. value, reward outcome, and temporal difference
 Massachusetts, 2008). Nature Neurosci. 7, 404–410 (2004). error representations in a probabilistic decision task.
6. Balleine, B. W., Daw, N. & O’Doherty, J. in 26. Schoenbaum, G. & Roesch, M. Orbitofrontal cortex, Cereb. Cortex 18, 652–663 (2007).
 Neuroeconomics: Decision-Making and the Brain associative learning, and expectancies. Neuron 47. Dreher, J. C., Kohn, P. & Berman, K. F. Neural coding
 (eds Glimcher, P. W., Fehr, E., Camerer, C. & 47, 633–636 (2005). of distinct statistical properties of reward information
 Poldrack, R. A.) 365–385 (Elsevier, New York, 2008). 27. Tom, S. M., Fox, C. R., Trepel, C. & Poldrack, R. A. in humans. Cereb. Cortex 16, 561–573 (2006).
7. Bouton, M. E. Learning and Behavior: A The neural basis of loss aversion in decision-making 48. Preuschoff, K., Quartz, S. R. & Bossaerts, P. Human
 Contemporary Synthesis (Sinauer Associates, Inc., under risk. Science 315, 515–518 (2007). insula activation reflects prediction errors as well as
 Sunderland, Massachusetts, 2007). This fMRI study showed that the striatal-OFC risk. J. Neurosci. 28, 2745–2752 (2008).
 This book reviews a large amount of evidence network encodes a value signal at the time of the This fMRI study shows that the human insula
 pointing to multiple valuation systems being active goal-directed choice that is consistent with the encodes risk-prediction errors that could be used
 in value-based decision making. properties of PT. Furthermore, the study presented to learn the riskiness of different options and that
8. Dayan, P. & Seymour, B. in Neuroeconomics: Decision evidence that suggests that both the appetitive are complementary to reward-prediction errors.
 Making and the Brain (eds Glimcher, P. W., Camerer, and the aversive aspects of goal-directed decisions 49. Tobler, P. N., Fiorillo, C. D. & Schultz, W. Adaptive
 C. F., Fehr, E. & Poldrack, R. A.) 175–191 (Elsevier, might be encoded in a common valuation network. coding of reward value by dopamine neurons.
 New York, 2008). 28. Plassmann, H., O’Doherty, J. & Rangel, A. Science 307, 1642–1645 (2005).
9. Dayan, P., Niv, Y., Seymour, B. & Daw, N. D. The Orbitofrontal cortex encodes willingness to pay 50. Platt, M. L. & Glimcher, P. W. Neural correlates
 misbehavior of value and the discipline of the will. in everyday economic transactions. J. Neurosci. of decision variables in parietal cortex. Nature
 Neural Netw. 19, 1153–1160 (2006). 27, 9984–9988 (2007). 400, 233–238 (1999).
 This paper provided several models of how 29. Hare, T., O’Doherty, J., Camerer, C. F., Schultz, W. & 51. Camerer, C. F. & Weber, M. Recent developments
 “pathological behaviours” can arise from the Rangel, A. Dissociating the role of the orbitofrontal in modelling preferences: uncertainty and ambiguity.
 competition process between Pavlovian, habitual cortex and the striatum in the computation of goal J. Risk Uncertain. 5, 325–370 (1992).
 and goal-directed valuation systems. values and prediction errors. J. Neurosci. (in the press). 52. Hsu, M., Bhatt, M., Adolphs, R., Tranel, D. &
10. Keay, K. A. & Bandler, R. Parallel circuits mediating 30. Paulus, M. P. & Frank, L. R. Ventromedial prefrontal Camerer, C. F. Neural systems responding to degrees
 distinct emotional coping reactions to different types of cortex activation is critical for preference judgments. of uncertainty in human decision-making. Science
 stress. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 25, 669–678 (2001). Neuroreport 14, 1311–1315 (2003). 310, 1680–1683 (2005).
11. Cardinal, R. N., Parkinson, J. A., Hall, J. & 31. Erk, S., Spitzer, M., Wunderlich, A. P., Galley, L. & 53. Huettel, S. A., Stowe, C. J., Gordon, E. M.,
 Everitt, B. J. Emotion and motivation: the role of the Walter, H. Cultural objects modulate reward circuitry. Warner, B. T. & Platt, M. L. Neural signatures
 amygdala, ventral striatum, and prefrontal cortex. Neuroreport 13, 2499–2503 (2002). of economic preferences for risk and ambiguity.
 Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 26, 321–352 (2002). 32. Fellows, L. K. & Farah, M. J. The role of ventromedial Neuron 49, 765–775 (2006).
12. Holland, P. C. & Gallagher, M. Amygdala-frontal prefrontal cortex in decision making: judgment under 54. Hertwig, R., Barron, G., Weber, E. U. & Erev, I.
 interactions and reward expectancy. Curr. Opin. uncertainty or judgment per se? Cereb. Cortex Decisions from experience and the effect of rare events
 Neurobiol. 14, 148–155 (2004). 17, 2669–2674 (2007). in risky choice. Psychol. Sci. 15, 534–539 (2004).
13. Fendt, M. & Fanselow, M. S. The neuroanatomical 33. Lengyel, M. & Dayan, P. Hippocampal contributions to 55. Weller, J. A., Levin, I. P., Shiv, B. & Bechara, A.
 and neurochemical basis of conditioned fear. control: the third way. NIPS [online] http://books.nips. Neural correlates of adaptive decision making for
 Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 23, 743–760 (1999). cc/papers/files/nips20/NIPS2007_0927.pdf (2007). risky gains and losses. Psychol. Sci. 18, 958–964
14. Adams, D. B. Brain mechanisms of aggressive 34. Montague, P. R. Why Choose This Book? (Dutton, (2007).
 behavior: an updated review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2006). 56. De Martino, B., Kumaran, D., Seymour, B. & Dolan, R. J.
 30, 304–318 (2006). 35. Fehr, E. & Camerer, C. F. Social neuroeconomics: Frames, biases, and rational decision-making in the
15. Niv, Y. in Neuroscience (Hebrew University, Jerusalem, the neural circuitry of social preferences. Trends human brain. Science 313, 684–687 (2006).
 2007). Cogn. Sci. 11, 419–427 (2007). 57. Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G. & O’Donoghue, T.
16. Dayan, P. & Abbott, L. R. Theoretical Neuroscience: 36. Lee, D. Game theory and neural basis of social Time discounting and time preference: a critical
 Computational and Mathematical Modeling of Neural decision making. Nature Neurosci. 11, 404–409 review. J. Econ. Lit. 40, 351–401 (2002).
 Systems (MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1999). (2008). 58. McClure, S. M., Laibson, D. I., Loewenstein, G. &
17. Balleine, B. W. Neural bases of food-seeking: affect, 37. Platt, M. L. & Huettel, S. A. Risky business: the Cohen, J. D. Separate neural systems value immediate
 arousal and reward in corticostriatolimbic circuits. neuroeconomics of decision making under uncertainty. and delayed monetary rewards. Science 306,
 Physiol. Behav. 86, 717–730 (2005). Nature Neurosci. 11, 398–403 (2008). 503–507 (2004).
 This important paper reviews a large amount of 38. Paulus, M. P., Rogalsky, C., Simmons, A., Feinstein, This fMRI study argued that competing goal-
 evidence pointing to multiple valuation systems J. S. & Stein, M. B. Increased activation in the right directed valuation systems play a part in decisions
 being active in value-based decision making. insula during risk-taking decision making is related that involve choosing between immediate small
18. Yin, H. H. & Knowlton, B. J. The role of the basal to harm avoidance and neuroticism. Neuroimage monetary payoffs and larger but delayed payoffs.
 ganglia in habit formation. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 19, 1439–1448 (2003). 59. McClure, S. M., Ericson, K. M., Laibson, D. I.,
 7, 464–476 (2006). 39. Leland, D. S. & Paulus, M. P. Increased risk-taking Loewenstein, G. & Cohen, J. D. Time discounting for
19. Killcross, S. & Coutureau, E. Coordination of actions decision-making but not altered response to primary rewards. J. Neurosci. 27, 5796–5804 (2007).
 and habits in the medial prefrontal cortex of rats. punishment in stimulant-using young adults. 60. Berns, G. S., Laibson, D. & Loewenstein, G.
 Cereb. Cortex 13, 400–408 (2003). Drug Alcohol Depend. 78, 83–90 (2005). Intertemporal choice - toward an integrative
20. Coutureau, E. & Killcross, S. Inactivation of the 40. Paulus, M. P. et al. Prefrontal, parietal, and temporal framework. Trends Cogn. Sci. 11, 482–488 (2007).
 infralimbic prefrontal cortex reinstates goal-directed cortex networks underlie decision-making in the 61. Kable, J. W. & Glimcher, P. W. The neural correlates
 responding in overtrained rats. Behav. Brain Res. presence of uncertainty. Neuroimage 13, 91–100 of subjective value during intertemporal choice.
 146, 167–174 (2003). (2001). Nature Neurosci. 10, 1625–1633 (2007).
21. Yin, H. H., Knowlton, B. J. & Balleine, B. W. Blockade 41. Huettel, S. A., Song, A. W. & McCarthy, G. This fMRI study argued that a single goal-directed
 of NMDA receptors in the dorsomedial striatum Decisions under uncertainty: probabilistic context valuation system plays a part in decisions that
 prevents action-outcome learning in instrumental influences activation of prefrontal and parietal involve choosing between immediate small
 conditioning. Eur. J. Neurosci. 22, 505–512 (2005). cortices. J. Neurosci. 25, 3304–3311 (2005). monetary payoffs and larger but delayed payoffs.


nature reviews | neuroscience advance online publication | 11
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.
REVIEWS

62. Read, D., Frederick, S., Orsel, B. & Rahman, J. 89. Small, D. M., Zatorre, R. J., Dagher, A., Evans, A. C. & 114. Bayer, H. M. & Glimcher, P. W. Midbrain dopamine
 Four score and seven years ago from now: the “date/ Jones-Gotman, M. Changes in brain activity related neurons encode a quantitative reward prediction error
 delay” effect in temporal discounting. Manage. Sci. to eating chocolate: from pleasure to aversion. signal. Neuron 47, 129–141 (2005).
 51, 1326–1335 (1997). Brain 124, 1720–1733 (2001). 115. Bayer, H. M., Lau, B. & Glimcher, P. W. Statistics of
63. Mischel, W. & Underwood, B. Instrumental ideation 90. Breiter, H. C., Aharon, I., Kahneman, D., Dale, A. & midbrain dopamine neuron spike trains in the awake
 in delay of gratification. Child Dev. 45, 1083–1088 Shizgal, P. Functional imaging of neural responses to primate. J. Neurophysiol. 98, 1428–1439 (2007).
 (1974). expectancy and experience of monetary gains and 116. Seymour, B., Daw, N., Dayan, P., Singer, T. & Dolan, R.
64. Wilson, M. & Daly, M. Do pretty women inspire men losses. Neuron 30, 619–639 (2001). Differential encoding of losses and gains in the human
 to discount the future? Proc. Biol. Sci. 271 (Suppl 4), 91. Knutson, B., Fong, G. W., Adams, C. M., Varner, J. L. & striatum. J. Neurosci. 27, 4826–4831 (2007).
 S177–S179 (2004). Hommer, D. Dissociation of reward anticipation 117. Daw, N. D., Kakade, S. & Dayan, P. Opponent
65. Berns, G. S. et al. Neurobiological substrates of dread. and outcome with event-related fMRI. Neuroreport interactions between serotonin and dopamine.
 Science 312, 754–758 (2006). 12, 3683–3687 (2001). Neural Netw. 15, 603–616 (2002).
66. Loewenstein, G. Anticipation and the valuation of 92. Zink, C. F., Pagnoni, G., Martin-Skurski, M. E., 118. Lohrenz, T., McCabe, K., Camerer, C. F. & Montague,
 delayed consumption. Econ. J. 97, 666–684 (1987). Chappelow, J. C. & Berns, G. S. Human striatal P. R. Neural signature of fictive learning signals in a
67. Stevens, J. R., Hallinan, E. V. & Hauser, M. D. The responses to monetary reward depend on saliency. sequential investment task. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
 ecology and evolution of patience in two New World Neuron 42, 509–517 (2004). 104, 9493–9498 (2007).
 monkeys. Biol. Lett. 1, 223–226 (2005). 93. Peyron, R. et al. Haemodynamic brain responses to 119. Camerer, C. F. & Chong, J. K. Self-tuning experience
68. Herrnstein, R. J. Relative and absolute strength of acute pain in humans: sensory and attentional weighted attraction learning in games. J. Econ. Theory
 response as a function of frequency of reinforcement. networks. Brain 122, 1765–1780 (1999). 133, 177–198 (2007).
 J. Exp. Anal. Behav. 4, 267–272 (1961). 94. Davis, K. D., Taylor, S. J., Crawley, A. P., Wood, M. L. & 120. Olsson, A. & Phelps, E. A. Social learning of fear.
69. Mazur, J. E. Estimation of indifference points with Mikulis, D. J. Functional MRI of pain- and attention- Nature Neurosci. 10, 1095–1102 (2007).
 an adjusting-delay procedure. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. related activations in the human cingulate cortex. 121. Montague, P. R. et al. Dynamic gain control of
 49, 37–47 (1988). J. Neurophysiol. 77, 3370–3380 (1997). dopamine delivery in freely moving animals. J. Neurosci.
70. Corrado, G. S., Sugrue, L. P., Seung, H. S. & 95. Seo, H. & Lee, D. Temporal filtering of reward signals 24, 1754–1759 (2004).
 Newsome, W. T. Linear‑nonlinear‑poisson models in the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex during a mixed- 122. Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. Advances in prospect
 of primate choice dynamics. J. Exp. Anal. Behav. strategy game. J. Neurosci. 27, 8366–8377 (2007). theory cumulative representation of uncertainty.
 84, 581–617 (2005). 96. Pecina, S., Smith, K. S. & Berridge, K. C. Hedonic hot J. Risk Uncertain. 5, 297–323 (1992).
71. Newsome, W. T., Britten, K. H. & Movshon, J. A. spots in the brain. Neuroscientist 12, 500–511 (2006). 123. Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A. Prospect Theory:
 Neuronal correlates of a perceptual decision. 97. Berridge, K. C. & Robinson, T. E. Parsing reward. an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica
 Nature 341, 52–54 (1989). Trends Neurosci. 26, 507–513 (2003). 4, 263–291 (1979).
72. Kim, J. N. & Shadlen, M. N. Neural correlates of a 98. Berridge, K. C. Pleasures of the brain. Brain Cogn. This seminal paper proposed the PT model for
 decision in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex of the 52, 106–128 (2003). goal-directed valuation in the presence of risk and
 macaque. Nature Neurosci. 2, 176–185 (1999). 99. Plassmann, H., O’Doherty, J., Shiv, B. & Rangel, A. provided some supporting evidence. It is one of the
73. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. The neural basis of decision Marketing actions can modulate neural representations most cited papers in economics.
 making. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 535–574 (2007). of experienced pleasantness. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 124. Chen, K., Lakshminarayanan, V. & Santos, L. How basic
74. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. Banburisms and the brain: 105, 1050–1054 (2008). are behavioral biases? Evidence from capuchin-monkey
 decoding the relationship between sensory stimuli, This paper showed that the level of “experienced trading behavior. J. Polit. Econ. 114, 517–537 (2006).
 decisions, and reward. Neuron 36, 299–308 (2002). pleasantness” encoded in the medial OFC at 125. Camerer, C. F. in Choice, Values, and Frames (eds
75. Gold, J. I. & Shadlen, M. N. Neural computations the time of consuming a wine is modulated by Kahneman, D. & Tversky, A.) (Cambridge Univ. Press,
 that underlie decisions about sensory stimuli. subjects’ beliefs about the price of the wine Cambridge, 2000).
 Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 10–16 (2001). that they are drinking. 126. Gilboa, I. & Schmeidler, D. Maxmin expected utility with
76. Heekeren, H. R., Marrett, S. & Ungerleider, L. G. 100. Montague, P. R., King-Casas, B. & Cohen, J. D. non-unique prior. J. Math. Econ. 28, 141–153 (1989).
 The neural systems that mediate human perceptual Imaging valuation models in human choice. Annu. Rev. 127. Ghirardato, P., Maccheroni, F. & Marinacci, M.
 decision making. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 9, 467–479 Neurosci. 29, 417–448 (2006). Differentiating ambiguity and ambiguity attitude.
 (2008). 101. Tremblay, L., Hollerman, J. R. & Schultz, W. J. Econ. Theory 118, 133–173 (2004).
77. Daw, N. D., Niv, Y. & Dayan, P. Uncertainty-based Modifications of reward expectation-related 128. Nestler, E. J. & Charney, D. S. The Neurobiology of
 competition between prefrontal and dorsolateral neuronal activity during learning in primate Mental Illness (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 2004).
 striatal systems for behavioral control. Nature striatum. J. Neurophysiol. 80, 964–977 (1998). 129. Kauer, J. A. & Malenka, R. C. Synaptic plasticity and
 Neurosci. 8, 1704–1711 (2005). 102. Hollerman, J. R. & Schultz, W. Dopamine neurons addiction. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 8, 844–858 (2007).
 This paper proposed a theoretical model of how report an error in the temporal prediction of reward 130. Hyman, S. E., Malenka, R. C. & Nestler, E. J.
 the brain might assign control to the different goal during learning. Nature Neurosci. 1, 304–309 (1998). Neural mechanisms of addiction: the role of reward-
 and habitual systems. 103. Schultz, W., Dayan, P. & Montague, P. R. A neural related learning and memory. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
78. Frank, M. J., Seeberger, L. C. & O’Reilly, R. C. substrate of prediction and reward. Science 29, 565–598 (2006).
 By carrot or by stick: cognitive reinforcement learning 275, 1593–1599 (1997). 131. Redish, A. D. & Johnson, A. A computational model
 in parkinsonism. Science 306, 1940–1943 (2004). This seminal paper proposed the connection between of craving and obsession. Ann. NY Acad. Sci.
79. Frank, M. J. Hold your horses: a dynamic the prediction-error component of reinforcement- 1104, 324–339 (2007).
 computational role for the subthalamic nucleus in learning models and the behaviour of dopamine cells. 132. Redish, A. D. Addiction as a computational process
 decision making. Neural Netw. 19, 1120–1136 (2006). 104. Mirenowicz, J. & Schultz, W. Importance of gone awry. Science 306, 1944–1947 (2004).
80. de Araujo, I. E., Rolls, E. T., Kringelbach, M. L., unpredictability for reward responses in primate This paper showed how addiction can be
 McGlone, F. & Phillips, N. Taste-olfactory convergence, dopamine neurons. J. Neurophysiol. 72, 1024–1027 conceptualized as a disease of the habit
 and the representation of the pleasantness of flavour, (1994). valuation system, using a simple modification
 in the human brain. Eur. J. Neurosci. 18, 2059–2068 105. Schultz, W. Multiple dopamine functions at different time of the reinforcement-learning model.
 (2003). courses. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 30, 259–288 (2007). 133. Paulus, M. P. Decision-making dysfunctions in
81. de Araujo, I. E., Kringelbach, M. L., Rolls, E. T. & 106. Schultz, W. Neural coding of basic reward terms of psychiatry—altered homeostatic processing?
 McGlone, F. Human cortical responses to water in animal learning theory, game theory, microeconomics Science 318, 602–606 (2007).
 the mouth, and the effects of thirst. J. Neurophysiol. and behavioural ecology. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 134. Miller, E. K. & Cohen, J. D. An integrative theory
 90, 1865–1876 (2003). 14, 139–147 (2004). of prefrontal cortex function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci.
82. Anderson, A. K. et al. Dissociated neural 107. Montague, P. R., Dayan, P. & Sejnowski, T. J. 24, 167–202 (2001).
 representations of intensity and valence in human A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems 135. Hazy, T. E., Frank, M. J. & O’Reilly, R. C. Towards an
 olfaction. Nature Neurosci. 6, 196–202 (2003). based on predictive Hebbian learning. J. Neurosci. executive without a homunculus: computational models
83. de Araujo, I. E., Rolls, E. T., Velazco, M. I., Margot, C. 16, 1936–1947 (1996). of the prefrontal cortex/basal ganglia system. Philos.
 & Cayeux, I. Cognitive modulation of olfactory 108. Yacubian, J. et al. Dissociable systems for gain- and Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 362, 1601–1613 (2007).
 processing. Neuron 46, 671–679 (2005). loss-related value predictions and errors of prediction in 136. Niv, Y., Joel, D. & Dayan, P. A normative perspective
84. McClure, S. M. et al. Neural correlates of behavioral the human brain. J. Neurosci. 26, 9530–9537 (2006). on motivation. Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 375–381 (2006).
 preference for culturally familiar drinks. Neuron 109. Tanaka, S. C. et al. Prediction of immediate and future
 44, 379–387 (2004). rewards differentially recruits cortico-basal ganglia Acknowledgements
85. Kringelbach, M. L., O’Doherty, J., Rolls, E. T. & loops. Nature Neurosci. 7, 887–893 (2004). Financial support from the National Science Foundation
 Andrews, C. Activation of the human orbitofrontal 110. Pagnoni, G., Zink, C. F., Montague, P. R. & Berns, G. S. (SES‑0134618, A.R.) and the Human Frontier Science
 cortex to a liquid food stimulus is correlated with its Activity in human ventral striatum locked to errors of Program (C.F.C.) is gratefully acknowledged. This work was
 subjective pleasantness. Cereb. Cortex 13, 1064–1071 reward prediction. Nature Neurosci. 5, 97–98 (2002). also supported by a grant from the Gordon and Betty Moore
 (2003). 111. O’Doherty, J. P., Dayan, P., Friston, K., Critchley, H. & Foundation to the Caltech Brain Imaging Center (A.R., C.F.C.).
86. Small, D. M. et al. Dissociation of neural Dolan, R. J. Temporal difference models and reward- R.M. acknowledges support from the National Institute on
 representation of intensity and affective valuation related learning in the human brain. Neuron 38, Drug Abuse, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders
 in human gustation. Neuron 39, 701–711 (2003). 329–337 (2003). and Stroke, The Kane Family Foundation, The Angel
87. Blood, A. J. & Zatorre, R. J. Intensely pleasurable 112. Knutson, B., Westdorp, A., Kaiser, E. & Hommer, D. Williamson Imaging Center and The Dana Foundation.
 responses to music correlate with activity in brain fMRI visualization of brain activity during a monetary
 regions implicated in reward and emotion. Proc. Natl incentive delay task. Neuroimage 12, 20–27 (2000).
 Acad. Sci. USA 98, 11818–11823 (2001). 113. Delgado, M. R., Nystrom, L. E., Fissell, C., Noll, D. C. FURTHER INFORMATION
88. O’Doherty, J. et al. Sensory-specific satiety-related & Fiez, J. A. Tracking the hemodynamic responses Author’s homepage: www.rnl.caltech.edu
 olfactory activation of the human orbitofrontal cortex. to reward and punishment in the striatum. All links are active in the online pdf
 Neuroreport 11, 399–403 (2000). J. Neurophysiol. 84, 3072–3077 (2000).


12 | advance online publication www.nature.com/reviews/neuro
 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.